<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981006.1830.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. It was a very nervous day in Washington, while the subject 
of impeaching the president is the background for almost everything 
there, it is the state of the world's economy that we begin with tonight. 
Today with financial officials from 182 countries in town, President 
Clinton said that the violence of boom and bust in so many places 
has got to be contained. Every country now knows it, every state in 
the union is now affected by it. The question is what to do about 
it? As the president said, this is not only a run on banks, in some 
places it is a run on nations. Our first report is from ABC's Sam 
Donaldson. With a whiff of panic spreading through financial markets 
everywhere, President Clinton made it clear today he thinks there 
may be very little time left to avert a worldwide financial disaster. 
The global economy simply cannot live with the kinds of vast and systemic 
disruptions that have occurred over the past year. It is time for 
decisive action. The president called for new international lending 
mechanisms to help nations stay out of trouble, said Europe must boost 
growth rates, Japan must clean up its banking system and deregulate 
its economy, and the United States must continue to exercise fiscal 
discipline. That is why I have made it clear to our Congress that 
I will veto any tax plan that threatens that discipline. And once 
again, the president called on Congress to free up $18 billion for 
the international monetary fund, blocked so far by key legislators 
who insist the IMF needs major reform first. We can debate how to 
reform the operations of the fire department, but there is no excuse 
for refusing to supply the fire department with water while the fire 
is burning. On Capitol Hill this afternoon, prospects for the IMF 
funding were said now to be much brighter, although it could get caught 
up in the president's threat to veto final spending bills, a threat 
that has caused republicans to renew their charge that Mr. Clinton 
is looking for a way to shut down the government. And we're concerned 
that they are thinking about a domestic "wag the dog," take advantage 
of, you know, some way to change the subject. White House officials 
insist shutting down the government is the last thing they want to 
do. Pointing to the world economic crisis is one reason that would 
be a dangerous action. There is a real sense of foreboding here, Peter, 
that while the U.S. economy is still quite strong, we could be dragged 
down by what's happening around us. One feels a sense of emergency 
coming out of there today. What about emergency plans? They're kicking 
around a lot of ideas, one is perhaps to have a summit of world leaders 
this fall. That's just in the talking stage. The fact is, no one has 
been able to come up with a magic bullet that would solve this problem 
quickly. Thanks very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>