<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981006.1830.1272 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're gonna take "A closer look" at a mysterious presence on the international 
scene tonight. That's how the international monetary fund describes 
itself. Its on web site on the Internet. It goes on to say there is 
considerable confusion about why it has existed since 1946 and what 
it does. Well, we agree. So here's a very basic description. The IMF 
is a cooperative institution that 182 countries have joined. Each 
country puts in money, according to its economic size. The IMF tries 
to help maintain a stable global economy through the orderly flow 
of money between countries, which have different currencies. When 
it is needed, it lends money under certain conditions, to member countries 
in need. To help us understand that and the dilemma which the IMF 
is in ABC's Robert Krulwich. Borrow money. But so do nations. In fact, 
every nation in the world, rich and poor, goes regularly to international 
investors and big banks and borrows money. And like all borrowers, 
nations have to pay interest at certain times. But every so often, 
a country gets into such trouble that when it's time to pay interest, 
they can't, or they won't. They haven't the money. And whenever a 
nation says "we won't pay," the word for that sends chills up bankers' 
spines. 'cause, after all, a bank, no matter how big, can't arrest 
a country or seize its assets. So, instead, the world financial system 
maintains a kind of emergency S.W.A.T. team. When a country's in real 
trouble, they send in the IMF, the international monetary fund, backed 
by 182 nations, which says, "okay, you can't pay now? Fine. We will 
lend you emergency money if," and here's where it gets interesting, 
"if you stop doing whatever it was that got you into this trouble 
in the first place." In Indonesia, the charge was that President Suharto 
and his family were so corrupt, they were disrupting the economy. 
In Thailand, it was that banks had made bad loans, lost millions and 
didn't tell anybody. They covered up their losses. Same in Korea -- 
banks hiding their losses. And in Russia, the bankers here gambled 
money, stole money and also hid their losses. In all four countries, 
the IMF said, "if you sign an agreement, promising to make changes, 
take your medicine, we'll give you more money." And what happened? 
In Indonesia, they took the money, but it didn't help. The country 
plunged into chaos. There were riots, massive unemployment. The president 
resigned. And Indonesia still didn't pay the banks. In Russia, the 
Yeltsin government took $4.8 billion in emergency money. But where 
did it go? People lined up at their banks, but that money just disappeared. 
Russians defaumted on some of their payments too. In Thailand, the 
banks stopped making bad loans, but they also stopped making loans, 
period. And the economy has weakened. In Korea, the situation seems 
to have stabilized. So this year, the IMF had four patients, one is 
stable, one is so-so, the other two are very sick and getting worse. 
The question is, is there a better way to do this? Robert Krulwich, 
ABC News. A better way, that of course is part of the debate in Washington 
now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>