<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981006.0842 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Established in the rubble of World War II, the Frankfurt Book Fair 
celebrates its 50th anniversary this year as the largest in the world. 
For five days every fall, publishers from all over the world exhibit 
their current and backlist books, seal publishing deals and trade 
translation rights in the halls of the Frankfurt fair grounds. Beginning 
Wednesday, nearly 300,000 visitors are expected to press through the 
halls to visit the 6,500 exhibitors from 105 countries and catch a 
glimpse of a favorite author. Among this year's participants: Ken 
Follet, Patricia Cornwell, Richard Baldacci and Stewart O'Nan. By 
comparison, the second largest book fair, in Chicago, features 1,000 
exhibitors. The birth of the Frankfurt Book Fair in September 1949 
was modest. ``It was held in St. Paul's Cathedral with only 200 exhibitors 
participating,'' director Peter Weidhaas recalled Tuesday. Frankfurt, 
like much of Germany, was in ruins, and the book fair was an attempt 
to return to normalcy. Germany's great book fair for centuries had 
been held in Leipzig, which after the war was under Soviet occupation 
and subject to communist censorship. Since establishing the Frankfurt 
fair, sponsors have evoked the Leipzig link, claiming a 500-year tradition 
that dates back to the invention of type by Gutenburg in Mainz. A 
modest book fair has been established in Leipzig since former communist 
East Germany was unified with West Germany in 1990. But after 50 years, 
Frankfurt's dominance is unchallenged. ``In Frankfurt, as early as 
1953 there were more international exhibitors at the fair than German. 
Today, the proportion is two thirds foreign to one third German exhibitors,'' 
said Weidhaas, the book fair's director. One attribute of the early 
post war years in Germany was the strong desire for uncensored and 
foreign literature, which was forbidden under the Nazis. American 
Thornton Wilder was the favorite playwright, Hemingway the favorite 
author. Even the United States Information Agency printed books by 
American authors in German and made them available in their Amerika 
Haus network. Since its inception, the book fair has survived its 
share of turbulence. In the late 1960s the wave of student protests 
against bourgeois literature, art and politics threatened to engulf 
the fair itself. In 1969, protesters destroyed stands of countries 
they considered undemocratic and police were called in to restore 
order. A number of publishers, upset about presence of police, closed 
their stalls and threatened never to return. But they did, the very 
next year. As Fred Jordan, editor of the New York, avant garde magazine, 
``Evergreen Review'' said in 1970: ``I come to Frankfurt because everybody 
in the business comes to Frankfurt. It seems to be our fate, no matter 
how much we complain about the city ...'' In 1976, the Frankfurt Booksellers 
Association, which sponsors the book fair, featured literature from 
Latin America, the first time a theme was adopted. The result was 
a huge success, attracting both big deals and readers to Latin American 
literature. A country or continent has been featured almost every 
year since. In its 50th year the Frankfurt Book Fair features Swiss 
writers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>