<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981006.1097 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The prospect of NATO air strikes moved ominously closer Tuesday as 
a top U.S. envoy warned Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic that 
he has not met U.N. demands for a peaceful solution to the crisis 
in embattled Kosovo province. Richard Holbrooke met the Yugoslav president 
for the second day Tuesday after visiting the southern Serbian province, 
where the Yugoslav forces were battling ethnic Albanian rebels seeking 
independence. In Kosovo, where he met ethnic Albanian political leaders, 
Holbrooke said that Serbian security forces still maintain a strong 
presence, despite U.N. demands for them to withdraw from areas of 
conflict and allow political settlement. ``U.S. diplomatic observers 
are doing a terrific job bringing us information, and the information 
they're bringing is not good,'' Holbrooke told reporters. Milosevic's 
crackdown against the secessionists has killed hundreds, left tens 
of thousands ethnic Albanians homeless and led to growing resolve 
among NATO allies to stop the bloodshed by striking Yugoslav army 
targets if necessary. Hours after Holbrooke left Kosovo for Belgrade, 
reporters saw about 100 Yugoslav security vehicles of all sorts _ 
ranging from armored personnel carriers to trucks loaded with troops 
_ moving outside Kosovo. It was an apparent show of Milosevic's compliance 
with international demands that his forces pull far back from front-line 
areas. Additionally, state-run Serbian TV claimed that all Serbian 
special police units, on the forefront of strikes against Kosovo Albanian 
militants, were pulled out of the province. Their pullback was one 
of the key international demands. Kosovo is a province of Serbia, 
the main republic of Yugoslavia. But ethnic Albanians form 90 percent 
of the 2 million-strong Kosovo population, and most favor self-rule. 
In Washington, U.S. President Bill Clinton said Holbrooke was telling 
the Yugoslav leader ``what he must do and to make clear that NATO 
is prepared to act if President Milosevic fails to honor the United 
Nations resolutions.'' ``The stakes are high,'' Clinton said. ``The 
time is now to end the violence in Kosovo.'' U.S. Defense Secretary 
William Cohen told Congress a pullback of troops in Kosovo by Milosevic 
was not enough to ward off NATO attacks. Any such air strikes might 
be followed by some form of ``international presence'' on the ground, 
he said. Cohen justified the prospective use of air power. ``He (Milosevic) 
stands to lose a substantial portion of his military capability ... 
There is a lot that can and will be done by air,'' Cohen said. If 
more Serb forces don't pull out of the province as demanded, NATO 
intervention ``will become inevitable,'' French President Jacques 
Chirac said. However, Yugoslav deputy Information Secretary Miodrag 
Popovic told the Associated Press Television News that the complete 
withdrawal of Yugoslav troops from Kosovo is out of question. ``Is 
there a country in the world that would do so, especially with an 
armed rebellion in their hands?'' Popovic asked. The Canadian government 
announced it was flying out nonessential diplomatic personnel and 
their families from Yugoslavia. Other countries were expected to follow 
suit. In Jerusalem, State Department spokesman James P. Rubin said 
that because Milosevic continued to resist ``sustainable and irreversible 
compliance with the demands of the international community ... NATO 
military preparations and discussions and decision-making continue 
on a fast track.'' Holbrooke, who negotiated the 1995 agreement that 
ended the Bosnian war, was dispatched to the Yugoslav capital of Belgrade 
in what appeared to be a last-chance effort to persuade Milosevic 
to halt his crackdown and enter meaningful talks with ethnic Albanians 
on the future of the province. But there was no sign of the diplomatic 
deadlock ending. Russian Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov told the Interfax 
news agency that Russia, a staunch ally of Serbia, would use its veto 
to stop any move to approve air strikes on Yugoslavia by the U.N. 
Security Council, which was set to take up Kosovo later Tuesday. The 
United States is trying to get Milosevic and the ethnic Albanians 
to agree on a deal that would defer for two or three years a decision 
on whether Kosovo would separate from Serbia. But the ethnic Albanians 
have refused to negotiate with Milosevic. NATO officials say they 
are ready to launch air strikes within hours of receiving an order 
to attack. No final decision is expected until Thursday, when ambassadors 
of the allied countries gather for a NATO Council meeting in Brussels. 
Chirac insisted that the Security Council must authorize any military 
intervention, but indicated that the human suffering going on might 
be the loophole NATO needs to go in, and that France would go along 
with that. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>