<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981006.0509 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia's gross domestic product will shrink by more than 5 percent 
and the country's trade will plummet because of the economic crisis, 
a top official predicted Tuesday in a plea for international aid. 
Russia's new tax chief, Georgy Boos, announced meanwhile that the 
tax service had collected only 9.3 billion rubles (dlrs 620 million) 
in September, 2 billion rubles (dlrs 133 million) less than in the 
previous month, Russian news agencies reported. The government has 
been running a large budget deficit for years and regularly lacks 
money to pay millions of state workers on time. But with the economy 
in decline, and most bank accounts frozen, tax collection has become 
even more difficult than usual. Deputy Economy Minister Nikolai Shamrayev, 
who announced a series of depressing economic figures, said help from 
the International Monetary Fund could soften the impact of the crisis. 
``The reaction of the world financial community is vital to correct 
the country's course,'' he told a conference of gas company executives 
and analysts in Moscow. Finance Minister Mikhail Zadornov and Central 
Bank chief Viktor Gerashchenko are in Washington this week trying 
to persuade the IMF to resume disbursement of its loan to bail out 
the Russian economy. A high-level delegation from the European Union 
is due in Moscow later this week. Shamrayev said that inflation should 
total 200-230 percent in 1998, but that IMF aid could limit the rate 
to 100 percent. Industrial production will fall 5.5 percent to 6 percent 
by the end of the year, he said. Imports will fall by 20-23 percent 
and exports will fall 13 percent, he said. Shamrayev's prediction 
of a 5-5.5 percent contraction in GDP is more optimistic than most 
analysts, who have said GDP could fall by as much as 8 percent. Shamrayev 
said that the slide could worsen, however, if the government is unable 
to restart the paralyzed banking system. Money transfers between businesses 
have been frozen. The head of Russia's gas monopoly Gazprom, Rem Vyakhirev, 
told the conference that the government would probably sell its 5 
percent stake in the gas giant within the next six weeks. The government 
has repeatedly postponed the sale of its stake because of poor market 
conditions. But Vyakhirev said the government needs the money because 
it looks unlikely to get any aid soon from the IMF. In Washington, 
Gerashchenko said a draft agreement on new terms for Russia to pay 
its debts to private banks could come as soon as Oct. 15 or Oct. 20, 
the ITAR-Tass news agency reported. Zadornov said that the government 
would provide the same terms for both Russian and foreign banks, ITAR-Tass 
said. In other economic news Tuesday: _ Customs revenues in September 
increased 39.5 percent over August, reaching 6.54 billion rubles (dlrs 
43 million), in spite of a 45 percent drop in imports, ITAR-Tass reported. 
The State Customs Committee attributed the increase to improved controls 
that stopped ``dishonest importers'' from avoiding customs duties. 
_ A top government official denied that the government has secretly 
been printing money to meet its budget obligations. There should be 
no talk of ``secret emissions that society wouldn't know about,'' 
said Andrei Korotkov, head of the government press office, according 
to Interfax. _ Inflation in Russia reached 38.4 percent in September, 
the State Statistics Committee said Tuesday, according to Interfax. 
In the first nine months of the year, consumer prices rose by 49.6 
percent. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>