<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981006.1157 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The prospect of NATO air strikes moved ominously closer Tuesday as 
a tgpQ.S. envoy warned Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic that 
he has not met U.N. demands for a peaceful solution to the crisis 
in embattled Kosovo province. Richard Holbrooke met the Yugoslav president 
for the second day Tuesday after visiting the southern Serbian province, 
where the Yugoslav forces were battling ethnic AMooke said that Serbian 
security forces still maintain a strong presence, despite U.N. demands 
for them to withdraw from areas of conflict and allow political settlement. 
``U.S. diplomatic observers are doing a terrific job bringing us information, 
and the information they're bringing is not good,'' Holbrooke told 
reporters. Milosevic's seven-month crackdown against the secessionists 
has killed hundreds, left tens of thousands of ethnic Albanians homeless 
and led to growing resolve among NATO allies to stop the bloodshed 
by striking Yugoslav army targets if necessary. Kosovo is a province 
of Serbia, the main republic of Yugoslavia. But ethnic Albanians form 
90 percent of the 2 million-strong Kosovo population, and most favor 
self-rule. Hours after Holbrooke left Kosovo for Belgrade, reporters 
saw about 100 Yugoslav military vehicles _ ranging from armored personnel 
carriers to trucks loaded with troops _ moving outside Kosovo. It 
was an apparent show of Milosevic's compliance with international 
demands that his forces pull far back from front-line areas. Additionally, 
state-run Serbian television claimed that all Serbian special police 
units, on the forefront of strikes against Kosovo Albanian militants, 
were pulled out of the province. In Washington, U.S. President Bill 
Clinton said Holbrooke was telling the Yugoslav leader ``what he must 
do and to make clear that NATO is prepared to act if President Milosevic 
fails to honor the United Nations resolutions.'' ``The stakes are 
high,'' Clinton said. ``The time is now to end the violence in Kosovo.'' 
U.S. Defense Secretary William Cohen told the Congress a pullback 
of troops in Kosovo by Milosevic was not enough to ward off NATO attacks. 
Any such air strikes might be followed by some form of ``international 
presence'' on the ground, he said. Cohen justified the prospective 
use of air power. ``He (Milosevic) stands to lose a substantial portion 
of his military capability ... There is a lot that can and will be 
done by air,'' Cohen said. If more Serb forces don't pull out of the 
province as demanded, NATO intervention ``will become inevitable,'' 
French President Jacques Chirac said. However, Yugoslav deputy Information 
Secretary Miodrag Popovic told Associated Press Television News that 
a complete withdrawal of Yugoslav troops is out of question. ``Who 
in the right mind would do so? Is there a country in the world that 
would do so, especially with an armed rebellion in their hands?'' 
Popovic asked. Holbrooke, who negotiated the 1995 agreement that ended 
the Bosnian war, was dispatched to the Yugoslav capital of Belgrade 
in what appeared to be a last-chance diplomatic effort. NATO officials 
say they are ready to launch airstrikes. No decision is expected until 
Thursday, when NATO ambassadors meet in Brussels. Albania's foreign 
minister said Tuesday that his country has offered its ports and airports 
to NATO for use in any military operation against neighboring Yugoslavia. 
``Albania has offered its support for such actions in Bosnia and will 
do so to support NATO's actions in Kosovo,'' Foreign Minister Paskal 
Milo told reporters in Albania's capital, Tirana. But Russian Foreign 
Minister Igor Ivanov told the Interfax news agency that Russia, a 
staunch ally of Serbia, would use its veto to stop any move to approve 
airstrikes on Yugoslavia by the U.N. Security Council, which was to 
discuss Kosovo later Tuesday. The Canadian government announced Tuesday 
that it was flying out nonessential diplomatic personnel and their 
families from Yugoslavia. Other countries were expected to follow 
suit. The United States is trying to get Milosevic and the ethnic 
Albanians to agree on a deal that would defer for two or three years 
a decision on whether Kosovo would separate from Serbia. But the ethnic 
Albanians have refused to negotiate with Milosevic, and U.S. Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright voiced skepticism Milosevic would adhere 
to any such plan. ``We are dealing with someone we never trusted,'' 
Albright said en route from Washington to Jerusalem, where she was 
on a Mideast peace initiative. The rebel Kosovo Liberation Army, whose 
attacks on Serb police prompted the crackdown, has rejected any peace 
formula short of full independence. The KLA has urged NATO to attack. 
``The Serbian war machine and its military and political structure 
must be destroyed,'' said Adem Demaci, a politician who speaks for 
the rebels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>