<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981006.1126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government used public funds to persuade voters to elect ruling 
party candidates in southern Chiapas state, opposition leaders said 
Tuesday. With 95 percent of the ballots counted in Sunday's vote, 
the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, led in most 
counties, and appeared to have recovered some mayorships it lost three 
years ago. However, the conservative National Action Party retained 
control of the state capital, Tuxtla Gutierrez. In Sunday's balloting, 
voters chose governments in 102 of the state's 111 counties and members 
of the 40-seat state legislature. The vote was postponed in eight 
flood-wrecked counties and residents boycotted elections in the highlands 
county of San Juan Chamula to protest the jailing a year ago of five 
men. Despite the relatively calm balloting in the conflict-ridden 
state, human rights organizations reported numerous irregularities. 
In San Cristobal de las Casas, hundreds of Indians received dlrs 21 
each from a federal anti-poverty program in the three days prior to 
balloting, the La Foja newspaper reported. In the highlands county 
of Huixtan, Indian peasants had to present their voter credentials 
on election day to receive federal agriculture subsidy checks, said 
Francisco Gallardo of the national election watchdog group Civic Alliance. 
In Ocosingo county, a bastion for the leftist rebel Zapatista National 
Liberation Army, opposition leaders said officials offered money and 
food for ruling party votes. They also accused federal troops and 
pro-government paramilitary groups of inhibiting voters by erecting 
checkpoints on main roads. Only about 24 percent of the electorate 
there voted, leaders of the Democratic Revolution Party said. Many 
rebel supporters boycotted the vote. In the flood-devastated Pacific 
Coast county of Tonala, National Action leaders accused the victorious 
ruling party candidate of using humanitarian aid to sway voters. Observers 
with the San Francisco-based group Global Exchange said last month's 
flooding and the presence of troops discouraged voter turnout in two-thirds 
of the state. State Congressman Jose Antonio Merida Mayorga, a leading 
ruling party member, denied any federal funds were used to persuade 
voters. ``We have in no way put the party label on humanitarian aid 
or other public works,'' Merida said. Chiapas voters ``can simply 
see that the opposition does not offer a political platform, but only 
seeks to shout about problems.'' Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, president 
of the leftist Democratic Revolution Party, said his party would demand 
new elections, including for governor. Gov. Roberto Albores Guillen 
was the second governor to be appointed since Eduardo Robledo Rincon 
was forced from office in Feburary 1995, two months into his term. 
Although the state constitution requires new elections in such cases, 
special balloting has never been called. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>