<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981006.1600.1488 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On both radio and TV, sports journalist Jim Rome is known for his 
sharp-tongued, quick-witted style. And now he has a new CD for his 
growing circle of fans. Paul Vercammen reports. All of us couch potatoes 
look at David Wells and think, "you know, I might be able to do that." 
Jim Rome sounds off as a talk show host on fox sports and on more 
than 100 radio stations. Albert Belle wants a restraining order against 
a woman he punched. Like I said before, what's next? Orenthal getting 
a restraining order against Nicole? Rome's radio show, "the jungle," 
is inhabited by callers often parroting his terminology, or glossary 
or gloss. I just want to say, you're blowing up here with the young 
crowd in C-town. C-town is Cleveland in Rome speak. As Cleveland rocks, 
so does "the jungle," with daily doses of music between segments, 
including the guns N' Roses song. You know the funny thing about the 
music business every athlete wants to be a rock 'N' roll guy. Every 
rock 'N' roll guy wants to be an athlete. And since I'm neither, I 
thought I'd make a CD. The new record combines "the jungle's" epic 
radio banter with songs played during the show. For openers, iggy 
pop's "lust for life." The CD may further distance Rome from "the 
incident" four years ago when he called pro quarterback Jim Everett 
"Chris." Chris -- it got out of hand. I'm sorry it happened, but I'm 
accountable to it. And people want to talk about it sometimes. People 
get a kick out of it. Athletes think it was the funniest thing they've 
ever seen. I can't say how many NFL players say, "that was just great" 
and "that was so funny." But is some of this mean-spirited? Yeah, 
I think that's something that I've heard before, but I don't really 
see it. You know, it's not mean-spirited. It's not nasty. It's not 
vindictive. It's not evil. What it is, is it's real. You know, this 
is the way I see the world. And I think if you want to look at anything 
I've ever said, either on radio or TV, I can justify anything I've 
ever said. It's not mean, but a lot of times, it's true. I'm the pimp 
in the box, you know me. Pimping all that is good. One of Los Angeles' 
100 most influential people, too, on the magazine rack. Check that 
out. Are you getting overexposed? Hell, I hope not. That would suck, 
wouldn't it? You know, I'm okay, I think. The TV show is something 
that we're building right now, and it's getting some momentum, and 
I'm very proud of that, and I feel good about that. The radio show, 
you can never get too much radio exposure, more exposure is good for 
radio. And the CD is something, it's just a project that I wanted 
to do. In "jungle" lingo -- now Jim Rome, multimedia pimp in the box. 
I'm out. Paul Vercammen, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>