<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981006.1830.0935 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is one doctor, who, for the last four decades now has been responsible 
for many of the new treatments and new drugs that are saving so many 
lives these days. We continue "in depth" with his story and NBC's 
Robert Bazell. I was diagnosed with cancer in 1981, and I feel great. 
I feel wonderful today. I had a lumpectomy 13 years ago, and I feel 
wonderful. It's been 17 years. There are millions of them. Breast 
cancer survivors, lives enhanced by a man they never met. That man 
is Dr. Bernard Fisher, and in his 40-year career, he has done more 
than anyone to improve care for breast cancer. how? By having the 
guts to challenge the entire medical establishment. I think you have 
to believe in what you're doing. And if you don't, you have no business 
doing it. When Fisher started in medicine, the main treatment for 
breast cancer was to remove the breast and the muscle from the chest 
wall . He set up clinical trials, scientific tests, to show that all 
that surgery was not necessary, eventually proving surgeons need only 
remove the lump not even the breast. The very concept of clinical 
trials means that you have to say as a physician, "I don't know all 
the answers." And that is very difficult to do. But it's the only 
thing to do, because no physician does know all the answers. Fisher 
often faced opposition, even ridicule form other doctors, but it did 
not stop him. In other trials, Fisher proved that chemotherapy and 
the hormone treatment, Tamoxifen, given soon after surgery help stop 
the cancer from coming back and enhance a woman's chances for survival, 
such a monumental achievement that tens of thousands of women benefit 
every year. Bernie Fisher, I think, saved many women's lives in this 
country because of his vision and his courage. But four years ago, 
Fisher's character came under fire. One of the hundreds of doctors 
helping with his trials had faked some data and congressmen accused 
him of complicity. You did not inform any medical journal of this 
falsified data? He was ultimately exonerated. But the incident left 
deep scars. One who goes through this will never get over it completely. 
Then recently, at age 79, Fisher announced yet another major discovery, 
that the drug Tamoxifen could help prevent women from getting cancer 
in the first place. This is the first time in history that we have 
evidence that breast cancer can not only be treated but also prevented. 
Despite all his achievement, Fisher remains disappointed that the 
horrible disease still strikes and kills so many women. And I guess 
I can say at the end of my career, I did my best. But I'm sorry that 
I didn't do better. But Dr. Fisher's best was enough to profoundly 
change medicine and improve millions of lives. Robert Bazell, NBC 
news, Pittsburgh. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>