<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981006.1830.1573 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
How many people fed up with the White House scandal have said something 
to the effect, "why can't we have honorable presidents, like the old 
days"? Well, the old days weren't scandal-free either. They just played 
by different rules. It's just one of the lessons of a remarkable new 
book called "the American century," written by Harry Evans, a British 
journalist who moved here, fell in love with the U.S. and became a 
citizen. Images from Evans' book are featured at a gallery in New 
York called the newseum. His stories, a newsreel of American history, 
a reminder how history repeats itself. Just look at what went on in 
the White House. It was 1985, Ronald Reagan and the Iran contra affair. 
The illegal sale of arms in exchange for American hostages and the 
diversion of profits to the nicaraguan rebels. The biggest scandal 
of our time was Iran contra. I am the one who is ultimately accountable 
to the American people. He smiled, the American people love Reagan, 
and all was forgotten. This makes Whitewater and Lewinsky look like 
a pea on a mountain. The abuses of power were direct. Nixon didn't 
just lie. He ran a school for perjury. Do you think that John F. Kennedy 
would be forgiven for his sexual transgressions if the public had 
known about them? I think he would, because part of the hidden glamour 
of Kennedy was that he was so attractive and so dashing and everyone 
fantasized about what his love life was like. The press in those days 
was much more the handmaiden of the president of the United States 
than it is today. In fact, if you want to contrast what happened in 
the Clinton episode, here we have a president, Franklin Roosevelt, 
who is a cripple. He cannot walk. And yet, never once did the photographers 
betray that confidence. And one or two photographs were taken, but 
they were never used. There was never ever any greater rogue in the 
oval office than Warren harding, probably. In a closet in the White 
House, continued to make love to nan Britton, who had a baby with 
him. Warren harding, in the meantime while he was having this illicit 
love life, was actually presiding over the biggest financial scandals 
in American history, the teapot dome scandal. Everyone was on the 
take. Woodrow Wilson. A very strong wife. A man who was practically 
on his deathbed for the last year and a half of his presidency. Well, 
the presidency was run by his wife, and it was greatly concealed. 
The whole thing was a pretense, and she was the secret administrator. 
She decided what papers he got and what papers he didn't. When you 
look at the American presidency over the past 100 years, what was 
it about it that surprised you most of all? How remote the president 
has got. There came a time when we wanted to create them as kind of 
kings, princes, the J.F.K. elevate them and give them a kind of glow 
which no man can live up to. And I think one of the problems now is 
having elevated to that, we can't find anybody with the morals enough 
to fill it. The book is called the "American century." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>