<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the first big combination of Internet retailers, the two biggest 
online music stores are in the final stages of negotiating a merger. 
N2K, of New York, and CD Now of Jenkintown, Pa., are preparing to 
merge, people involved in the negotiations said Tuesday. The deal 
will be structured as a merger of equals, with management shared between 
the two companies, they said, declining to discuss the financial terms. 
Representatives of both companies declined to comment. Both companies 
were once the darlings of Internet investors, but in recent weeks 
their stocks have fallen not only below their highs but well below 
their initial offering prices. CD Now's stock ended at $7.9375 Tuesday, 
up 43.75 cents, giving it a market capitalization of $139 million. 
N2K's stock closed at $4.50, down 25 cents, giving it a market capitalization 
of $64 million. Although they are both online music stores, the two 
companies are very different in terms of history and style. N2K was 
founded by Larry Rosen and David Grusin, music industry veterans who 
founded the GRP record label. The company has emphasized deep content 
and information about music through various sites devoted to genres 
such as Rocktropolis and Jazz Central Station, as well as sites devoted 
to individual artists like Leonard Bernstein. All of these sites linked 
to Music Boulevard, its online store. Playing off the experience of 
its founders, N2K had started a record label as preparation for the 
day when music can be downloaded directly to users, bypassing CD manufacturing 
altogether. But recently, the company pulled back from this business, 
halted the signing of new artists and laid off some staff. CD Now 
was founded by Jason and Mathew Olim, 29-year-old twins. Its business 
has been much more streamlined, emphasizing a simple fast way to buy 
music. Increasingly, it has added tools to help users find music they 
like by showing them choices of other people who have similar tastes. 
CD Now has been much more aggressive in signing up ``affiliates'' 
_ that is, other web sites about music _ often run by fans, that refer 
surfers to their store in return for a commission. CD Now has 100,000 
affiliates, while N2K has about 7,000. Both companies offer essentially 
the same stock because they both use the same wholesale distribution 
firm, Valley Record Distributors, to warehouse the CD's and ship them 
to their clients. CD Now is bigger with sales of $11 million in the 
last quarter. N2K had sales of $10 million, but it is growing faster. 
CD Now said it has 569,000 customers and N2K said it has 522,000 customers. 
Each of the two companies has raised money in public stock offerings 
and spent much of it to secure the rights to be the exclusive music 
seller on various Internet Portal sites. CD Now is on Yahoo and Lycos, 
while N2K is on America Online, Excite and Netscape. Combined, the 
two companies would have about 45 percent of the online music market, 
according to industry estimates. One important source of competition 
is Amazon.com, the pioneering online bookseller, which has recently 
added a music store. Another big player is Columbia House, the music 
club owned by Time Warner Inc. and Sony, which offers online music 
clubs and a regular store called Total E. Advisers to the transaction 
do not expect any antitrust problems because online music sales still 
represent a small portion of the overall market. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>