<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0400 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By the time William Kapell died in a plane crash in October 1953, 
at 31, he had already come to be recognized as the finest pianist 
America had produced. The popular pianists at the time were foreign-born: 
Horowitz, Rubinstein, Brailowsky, Hofmann. Then Kapell appeared, out 
of nowhere, it seemed, the son of a couple who owned a bookstore on 
Manhattan's Lexington Avenue. He was strong-willed, insecure, compulsive, 
combative, a neurotically driven New Yorker. In photographs he looks 
a little like Olivier in profile. As an artist he was stupefyingly 
gifted, and everyone knew it. By his mid-20s he had a major career, 
a contract with RCA Victor, dates with Ormandy, Stokowski, Reiner, 
Monteux and Steinberg. His recording of the Khachaturian's Concerto 
with Koussevitzky became a jukebox hit. Then he died, and as often 
happens, the fame faded. His recordings went out of print by 1960, 
and after that, only a few were occasionally available. Pianists still 
talked of him as an icon who had paved the way for the first generation 
of Americans to make a mark on the international scene _ Kapell was 
Van Cliburn's hero, for example, and many of those who heard Kapell 
in concert could, half a century later, still recall the experience 
as if it were yesterday _ but the public mostly forgot him. So a new 
boxed set of nine CDs, containing not only previously released commercial 
recordings but also numerous recordings never before issued (RCA Red 
Seal 09026-68442-2), should come as a revelation to many. It is a 
landmark among piano recordings, and I suspect that anyone who hears 
Kapell for the first time will find his playing simply mind-boggling. 
We are confronted here with an artist we now recognize as modern. 
He was a modern pianist of his generation, as Rubinstein was in the 
previous generation. Virgil Thomson once said that Kapell ``was afraid 
of nobody because his heart was pure.'' What made him modern wasn't 
just the fact that over the objections of his cautious managers he 
championed living American composers and played their music with conviction. 
It was also that in the context of Lhevinne, Cortot, Friedman and 
other performers of the Romantic and virtuosic repertory whose esthetic 
roots were still in the late 19th century, Kapell represented a different 
approach: his performances were close to the score, balanced, architecturally 
sound while still being passionate. Incredibly passionate. He had 
one of the great electrifying techniques (not even Horowitz played 
Liszt with more wry gusto), but he was in the end a poet. Dinu Lipatti, 
the ultimate pianist-poet, who also died young, makes a useful point 
of comparison: roughly the same age as Kapell, he played with a divine, 
almost unreal perfection and a precise moderation that we might now 
call post-Romantic, but he was a more strictly lyrical pianist than 
Kapell, whose style encompassed a singular degree of raw, demonic 
energy. In a recorded interview, excerpted on one of the new disks, 
Kapell remarks how an ``older school'' of pianists ``overplays the 
so-called Romantic aspects'' of Chopin. He says that they favor ``excessive 
rubati and a general weakening of the form more than anything else, 
and a weakening of transitional, cadential strengths in the music.'' 
Then, quickly, he adds, ``the danger is too much objectivism, so to 
speak.'' And this, in a nutshell, was Kapell's genius: always, or 
almost always, to grasp the necessary balance, which is why pianists 
like Schnabel (who taught him for a while) and Rubinstein (with whom 
he had an on-and-off friendship) could claim him as an heir. John 
Pfeiffer, one of his producers, once described how Kapell would do 
take after take after take in the studio, sometimes dozens at a time. 
``There was never a moment when you could just sit down and relax 
and enjoy the atmosphere or anything of that sort,'' Pfeiffer said. 
``It was all extremely intense.'' Like other great artists, Kapell 
was a perfectionist. He practiced eight hours a day, even on the day 
of a recital. He recorded Chopin, Rachmaninoff, Liszt, Prokofiev, 
Khachaturian and Beethoven. But some pieces that he performed he never 
recorded commercially, because he didn't get around to them or he 
felt he wasn't yet ready. Others he recorded, but the recordings were 
never released: evidently, he found them unacceptable or they were 
not complete (a Bach partita with the gigue missing). So his recordings 
languished in the BMG/RCA vaults until Jon M. Samuels, the producer 
of the new set, began to hunt through them. He discovered a trove 
of fresh material. Some private recordings turned up, along with an 
invaluable tape of a WNYC radio broadcast of a Kapell recital at the 
Frick Collection in 1953, which included Copland's Piano Sonata, the 
only recorded performance of the piece by Kapell. Samuels put together 
a variety of music in addition to what had previously been released: 
works by Bach, Abram Chasins, Debussy, Mozart, Scarlatti, Schubert, 
Schumann and so on. There were also cello and violin sonatas with 
William Primrose and Jascha Heifetz. What results is, if not a radically 
new vision of Kapell, a much larger, truer sense of his legacy, and 
a moving portrait of a young musician in the midst of change. For 
instance, we hear Kapell playing different versions of the same work. 
Compared with his 1947 recording of a Schumann Romance, the version 
he recorded in 1949 sounds much smoother, more serene, with gorgeous 
long lines and a steady beat. One version of a Bach allemande is grave 
and heartbreaking; another, earlier one is brisker, less reflective. 
Kapell was turning more to Bach before he died, and the affinity was 
so natural, the playing so original (listen to his D major Partita) 
that had he lived, he might have reshaped the public's notion of Bach's 
keyboard music as much as Gould did (and Kapell was never willful). 
What if? Kapell since his death has been one of music's conspicuous 
what if's. He would now be 76, so it is conceivable that he might 
still be playing. The set shows an evolving sensibility, one that 
had not always perfectly formed. Having established himself in big 
Romantic music, he took sabbaticals to study Mozart and Schubert, 
and what we hear in his recordings of a couple of movements from Mozart 
sonatas, for example, is charming but precious and unsteady. Kapell 
couldn't play an unmusical note, but he doesn't yet wholly inhabit 
this music either. One attribute of the set is that it includes music, 
like the Mozart, with a few slipped notes and unresolved ideas, which, 
paradoxically, make the young Kapell seem more impressive. He is revealed 
to be an artist in progress: spontaneous, thinking, taking risks, 
sometimes impatient; nothing is ever automatic or dull. And to judge 
from his performance of the Beethoven Second Concerto (with Vladimir 
Golschmann and the NBC Symphony), he was capable of playing the Classical 
repertory as well as anyone. I can imagine that he might have become 
a Mozart and Schubert player akin to Clifford Curzon, given time. 
Of course, he didn't have time. About what he did do, I take for granted 
the basics: that his performances of Chopin and the Russians are among 
the best on record. There isn't a more Herculean or amusing version 
of ``Pictures at an Exhibition'' than the one here from the Frick 
recital. Kapell, unlike most pianists, plays ``The Great Gate of Kiev'' 
as marked, Allegro alla breve, not pompously slow. ``The Ballet of 
the Chicks,'' besides being fast (he plays it presto then adds an 
accelerando), is a riot. What is not often said about Kapell is that 
he could be very funny. His version of several Shostakovich preludes 
manages to sound wicked and jaunty while somehow remaining, deep down, 
melancholic. The Chopin mazurkas are full of wit and variety. He brings 
to the second theme of the one in C major (Op. 33, No. 3), for example, 
a kind of quizzical tone, moderated, not forte, as marked; and to 
the familiar Mazurka in G sharp minor (Op. 33, No. 1), just enough 
reserve to make you hear it fresh. The same could be said for his 
version of Rachmaninoff's Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini with Reiner 
and the Robin Hood Dell Orchestra. The work's hackneyed slow variation 
comes across with such restrained emotion and elegance that it made 
me weep. As it happens Kapell wrote in his diary in 1943, on the day 
Rachmaninoff died, that he ``worked a couple of hours on the `Paganini 
Rhapsody' and cried all the way through it because I realized that 
the great master was no more.'' Then he added what we might also say 
about him, through these recordings: ``I am comforted that every day 
I can open the covers of some wonderful and magic world that he expressed 
in music. He shall never die for those who can play his works or for 
those fortunate enough to want to hear them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>