<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
North Beach is a gentle old Italian neighborhood that ambles up the 
hill from San Francisco Bay, in the shade of Telegraph Hill. Only 
30 years ago, the small streets were lined with butchers who made 
their own sausages, and with bakeries that supplied every Italian 
restaurant in town. Old men played boccie in the park in front of 
the Church of Saints Peter and Paul, and argued over espresso in the 
sidewalk cafes along Columbus Avenue. The neighborhood was sprinkled 
with modest restaurants _ Columbus, U.S., Little Joe's _ where bachelors 
gathered nightly to talk politics and eat good, solid meals at low 
prices. When the Beats arrived in the 1950s, they coexisted peacefully 
with the population, and even the sex shops crawling along Broadway 
gave the place personality. There was a fine balance until Chinatown 
began to encroach from the western end and the Italians began moving 
out; suddenly, it seemed, the strip joints were dominant. By the early 
'80s, it was impossible to go into any of the neighborhood places 
without being bombarded by a standard lament: The neighborhood was 
disappearing. Storefronts stood empty, one by one the restaurants 
started to close, and even the cafes seemed sad. The people who loved 
North Beach began to anticipate its demise. And then, something remarkable 
happened: North Beach reinvented itself through food. It started slowly, 
with a restaurant here and a cafe there. But in the last year the 
North Beach movement has picked up steam. Restaurants are opening 
at a stunning rate, and once moribund shops and bakeries are packed. 
And why not? The neighborhood has charm. It has history. It is one 
of San Francisco's sunniest areas and it is just a short walk from 
the financial district or Fisherman's Wharf. More important, North 
Beach has character. San Francisco has always loved food, and today 
it is filled with important new restaurants. I tried them all. I was 
impressed with Jardiniere, bowled over by the transformation of the 
old Trader Vic's into the new Colonial, stunned by the decor at Loongbar. 
But you could pick those restaurants up, plunk them down in any city 
in America and they would be fine. The best restaurants of North Beach, 
on the other hand, need the neighborhood. They belong to San Francisco. 
And I found myself irresistibly drawn back. I spent days wandering 
the streets of North Beach, stopping by its hardware stores, bakeries, 
coffee roasters and pottery shops. I ate in restaurants old and new. 
And although I had many wonderful meals, in the end I found myself 
returning to the ones with the strongest sense of place. Because the 
remarkable thing about North Beach is that, unlike Times Square in 
New York, which is being sanitized into an urban entertainment mall, 
its renaissance has been organic, gradual and utterly inclusive. The 
neighborhood thrums with activity, and every shop is occupied. Diners 
leaving San Francisco's hottest new restaurants still find themselves 
accosted by barkers urging them to come in and watch women take off 
their clothes. Meanwhile, City Lights Bookstore, as scruffy as ever, 
is a constant reminder of the area's literary past. North Beach feels 
raucous, alive, vibrant. It feels loved. Nowhere do you get a better 
sense of this than at the corner of Broadway and Kearny Street, the 
gateway to North Beach. On the north side of the street, Enrico's, 
one of the area's most venerable institutions, has been given a new 
lease on life. Although Enrico Banducci made a valiant effort to keep 
it going, the restaurant died in the '80s. It stood empty for a while, 
and then Rick Hackett, Meredith Melville and Mark McCloud, who have 
worked at the East Bay's best restaurants (Olivetto, Chez Panisse 
and Bay Wolf), bought the building and pumped in money, energy and 
spirit. They upgraded the food and wine while leaving the restaurant's 
raffish energy intact. There is almost no time of the day or night 
when the joint doesn't jump. In the daytime, people sit outside eating 
spaghetti and salads. At night, wisecracking waitresses thread their 
way through the crowded room, delivering baked goat cheese salads 
with baby spinach and grilled pork ribs. Lamb chops from the trendy 
Niman Ranch are cooked in a wood-burning oven, and potatoes are mashed 
with rivers of butter. The food is more likable than fabulous, but 
the room has a raw energy that is fueled by live jazz and a sense 
of history. Looking around, you expect Jack Kerouac to show up any 
moment. Enrico's, 504 Broadway; (415) 982-6223. Dinner main courses, 
$11.95 to $22.25. When the Black Cat opened just across the street 
in June, the city's outspoken mayor, Willie Brown, reportedly looked 
around the room and said, ``Well, they finally named a restaurant 
after me.'' Indeed; few restaurants fit so perfectly into their neighborhoods. 
``Like Broadway,'' the menu says, ``Black Cat celebrates the uneasy 
pot that never quite melts _ San Francisco.'' The owner, Reed Hearon, 
conceived the casual restaurant as a tribute to Broadway, filling 
the menu with dishes from the neighborhood's past. The food honors 
Chinatown with dishes like brightly colored chow mein with roast duck, 
chanterelles and Chinese chives and soothing salmon jook, a thick 
rice chowder with ginger and shiitake mushrooms. But the real winner 
among the Chinese-style dishes is spot prawns, fished live from a 
tank and poached simply in the Cantonese style. To New Yorkers unfamiliar 
with the big, succulent West Coast prawns (which are often laden with 
roe), they are a special treat. The tank also houses Dungeness crabs, 
which are cooked in the Chinese manner (black beans, ginger and scallions) 
or the Italian (spiced and served atop spaghetti). The Italian food 
tends to be more delicate than the heavily sauced, garlicky food I 
remember from the old North Beach. There is, for instance, a wonderful 
frito misto of artichokes and fennel with shaved Parmesan, fragile 
ravioli filled with red snapper and wild greens, and an awesome capponada 
that does not remotely resemble the similarly named Sicilian eggplant 
salad. A robust mixture of soaked bread, greens, tiny tomatoes, tuna, 
anchovies, olives and hard-boiled eggs, capponada is a Lenten dish 
that I found absolutely irresistible. This being San Francisco, you 
can also get sand dabs with tartar sauce or a fine rib eye steak for 
two, on the bone. And for dessert, be sure not to miss the donut holes 
filled with apricot or ricotta cheese. Black Cat, 501 Broadway; (415) 
981-2233. Dinner main courses, $9.50 to $25. Hearon's other restaurant, 
Rose Pistola, is also a conscious tribute to the neighborhood. Named 
for one of the ``old stoves'' of North Beach (Hearon traded Mrs. Pistola, 
87, a permanent table for the use of her name), it is a chic, modern 
homage to the Ligurian people who first populated North Beach. Meals 
begin with little plates bearing clear, mingled flavors. Shaved artichokes 
are dotted with fava beans and tossed with lemon and parsley. Crostini 
are laden with prosciutto, bright green leaves of arugula and figs 
grilled until they melt into the crescenza cheese on top. Sardines 
are grilled and drizzled with lemon. And rabbit livers are wrapped 
in pancetta, skewered with rosemary and painted with tapenade. There 
are various pizzas and a few pasta dishes, and at the heart of the 
menu are meat and fish simply grilled or roasted. But the real triumph 
of Rose Pistola is the cioppino _ a huge silver pot of San Francisco's 
famous seafood stew, rich with crab, mussels, rockfish and calamari. 
Ladled into beautiful blue bowls, it is how the stuff at Fisherman's 
Wharf longs to taste. For dessert there is another local treasure, 
sacripantina. The original, a specialty of the nearby Stella Bakery, 
is a fluffy blond cake that is as light as air. The Rose Pistola version 
is denser, richer and, as far as I am concerned, an improvement. Rose 
Pistola, 532 Columbus Ave.; (415) 399-0499. Main courses, $9.50 to 
$24.50. If Rose Pistola is a tribute to the past, the four-month-old 
Tavolino is an ode to the future. A beautifully designed room with 
walls washed with colors and trimmed in warm woods, it has hand-blown 
glass lamps hanging over granite counters. The air, in this re-creation 
of a Venetian bacaro _ a place serving the little snacks called cicchetti 
(pronounced chee-KET-tee) _ is rich with garlic and olive oil. The 
wine list is wonderful. And the food is surprising, savory, very delicious. 
Is there anyone who could resist crisp brown little marbles that turn 
out to be fried olives stuffed with anchovies? These little snacks 
are so good that it is easy to find yourself eating more than you 
intended. House-made sausages are served with polenta. Grilled nectarines 
are framed by rosy slices of prosciutto and sweet, floppy chunks of 
Taleggio cheese. The leaves of arugula on top are the perfect accent. 
I love the spicy olive-oil-braised green beans and the crisp, long 
rectangles of soft polenta punctuated by Gorgonzola cheese. Other 
terrific little tastes include seabass in saor, a classic Venetian 
sweet and sour sauce, and tramezzini, pressed triangles of sandwich 
with interesting fillings like portobello mushrooms and goat Cheddar. 
Even desserts are impressive: I like the polenta tart with pears and 
raspberries so much that it is hard to resist seconds. But despite 
all this high-end charm, there are still reminders that some things 
about North Beach have not changed. One afternoon, I watched two older 
gentlemen wander in at 3 and order martinis, straight up, with a few 
tramezzini. It made me wish I still lived in San Francisco. Tavolino, 
401 Columbus Ave.; (415) 392-1472. Little dishes from $3.25 to $9.75. 
The most touching new restaurant in North Beach is L'Ostria del Forno, 
a tiny little place that has recaptured the old spirit of the neighborhood. 
There are just eight tables, only cash is accepted and all the cooking 
is done in the pizza oven. The choice of wines is limited to five 
bottles, none more than $20. ``Have the sangiovese,'' our waitress 
told us, matter of factly, ``it's better than the Chianti.'' We took 
her advice on the food as well. And so we had cipolline in agrodolce 
_ little onions simmered with vinegar, sugar and oregano _ that were 
spare and good. Grilled sweet peppers were slicked with olive oil, 
garlic and parsley. Speck, an Italian ham, was paired with fat white 
beans, arugula and shavings of Parmesan to make a robust and satisfying 
way to start a meal. The pizzas are fine, there is a robust roasted 
meat of the day (served with potatoes) and good polenta, roasted in 
the oven with Gorgonzola. A different baked pasta is pulled from the 
oven each day. The food is hearty, uncomplicated and very satisfying, 
and the prices are astonishingly low. The great ricotta cheese cake 
costs just $3 and the espresso, which costs $1.50, is served with 
biscotti. Looking around the sweet little restaurant, you could easily 
persuade yourself that nothing had changed in North Beach. When the 
ghosts gather to play boccie in front of the church across the street, 
I am sure they are smiling. L'Osteria del Forno, 519 Columbus Ave.; 
(415) 982-1124. Dishes from $3.75 to $9.25. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>