<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0315 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
France Telecom, which pioneered the quirky Minitel online information 
service years before anyone ever heard of the World Wide Web, announced 
plans Wednesday to bring its aging child into the modern world. Working 
with IBM Corp., the French telephone company said it would develop 
a network to let customers surf the Internet with simple and cheap 
screen-based telephones, which would also be inexpensive. If all goes 
according to plan, the new devices would give technophobic customers 
access to the Internet without using a more complex personal computer. 
Though the Minitel system would continue to exist, with its homely 
little terminals and its proprietary network, the company hopes many 
people will simply gravitate to the newer system and its allure of 
worldwide access. IBM is supposed to deliver a prototype networking 
system by the end of this year, and France Telecom officials hope 
to start commercial service by the end of 1999. Minitel, which was 
begun 15 years ago by the French government, was one of the first 
online consumer information services. Conceived as a way to bring 
advanced communications to ordinary people, the Minitel came before 
personal computers had Windows, before America Online and long before 
the World Wide Web. And when the World Wide Web exploded in popularity, 
allowing people to flit to computers around the world with a few mouse 
clicks, the Minitel remained almost obstinately old-fashioned. It 
remains slow, has no graphics and offers access to little outside 
France. But it remains popular in its home country, where it has about 
15 million users and is host to about 25,000 services. ``This is not 
the end of Minitel, but we have to prepare for the future,'' said 
Jean-Jacques Damlamlin, vice president for development at France Telecom. 
``Some people are not willing to use PCs for electronic commerce, 
but they are willing to see us provide a substitute for their Minitels.'' 
Minitel may be slow and dull to watch, but it is simple, cheap and 
free from hackers. It generates billions of francs worth of fees from 
electronic commerce, from train reservations to flower deliveries. 
Old-fashioned or not, political leaders and many industry experts 
worry that Minitel's enduring popularity has held back the Internet 
in France. In a speech in August 1997, Prime Minister Lionel Jospin 
startled many people by suggesting just that. Minitel, he said, ``could 
be hindering the development of new and promising applications of 
information technology.'' Under the agreement announced Wednesday, 
IBM is to develop a new networking platform that connects a new generation 
of Internet devices. Unlike most other Internet access providers, 
France Telecom would take responsibility for maintaining and upgrading 
the software on individual terminals. Most of the management and navigational 
information, including profiles of users and their bookmarks of favorite 
Web sites, would be held within the telephone company's network rather 
than in the terminals. But France Telecom executives, who refused 
to say how much money would go into the new contract, acknowledged 
there were many uncertainties. The biggest is whether the new screen-based 
telephones will be cheap enough to attract customers. With computer 
prices low and falling, company executives say they still do not know 
for certain whether the new devices have enough price advantage to 
be economically viable. Though IBM, which is based in Armonk, N.Y., 
is developing the networking system, France Telecom wants other companies 
to build the terminals. Company officials say they want to encourage 
a wide array of equipment manufacturers, and that one of the reasons 
they chose IBM was that the American computer giant has very little 
interest in building terminals. ``We want the system to be completely 
open,'' Damlamlin said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>