<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here he comes. Here comes Dan Reeves, the former New York Giants head 
coach, back into Giants Stadium as the Atlanta Falcons head coach. 
The guy one of his former Giants players (Mike Sherrard) said ran 
a Big Ten offense. The guy one of his former Giants quarterbacks (Dave 
Brown) said offered an offense that was too cumbersome and too archaic 
to flourish. The guy who left the Giants after the 1996 season in 
a huff, who asked the Giants to change their ways, to be more aggressive 
in free agency and work more with him in building through the draft. 
The man who during four years as coach wanted more of an imprint but 
was rebuffed. The Giants brass said, we pick 'em, you coach 'em. Reeves 
said thanks, but no thanks. So, he took his style, his philosophies 
and his convictions and traveled to Atlanta, where he became general 
manager and head coach. Where he could pick 'em and coach 'em. He 
took his Big Ten offense where it would be welcome. And, excuse the 
rub, but the Falcons arrive to face the Giants on Sunday night having 
just hung 51 points on the Carolina Panthers last Sunday; most of 
those points were scored by the Falcons offense, and that is the most 
points scored by a team this season. Meanwhile, the Giants offense 
is crumbling, having scored only 3 points last Sunday in their loss 
at Tampa Bay. Atlanta owns a 3-1 record. The Giants are 2-3. The Falcons 
offense ranks 16th in the 30-team National Football League. The Giants 
rank 27th. The Falcons rank No. 2 in third-down efficiency (46.6 percent). 
The Giants rank 30th (20.5 percent). The Falcons rank No. 2 in possession 
time (32 minutes 57 seconds). The Giants rank 25th (27:40). Maybe 
the Giants ought to embrace that Big Ten offense. ``If people said 
that about my offense, then I'm OK with it because the Big Ten won 
the national championship last year and that's not bad,'' Reeves said, 
scoffing, but obviously perturbed. Who wouldn't be? Here is the coach 
who has won more games (151) than any other current NFL coach. His 
team was 11-5 in 1993, his first Giants season, and he was coach of 
the year, and everything seemed so lovely. ``But that first year, 
we didn't have to make a lot of personnel decisions,'' Reeves said. 
``It was a noncap year. The salary cap came, and all of a sudden a 
bunch of players were being let go. I understood some of the decisions 
being made involving money. But I wanted some things to change and 
they were not going to change. ``Whenever you have differences like 
that, it's never any one person's fault. I take some blame. I could 
have always just gotten by, but that is not a situation I ever want 
to be in. I do not dwell on it. There were some good times there, 
too, and I remember them.'' Reeves went home. To the Georgia, to Atlanta, 
140 miles north of his hometown, Americus. The Falcons, coming off 
a 3-13 season, were so taxed and tangled that they opened the doors 
wide open for Reeves for the 1997 season and said, please, fix this 
mess. Reeves rolled up his sleeves. He instilled discipline. Worked 
toward unselfishness. Started changing attitudes. Built a team on 
the running game and on defense. And then reminded everyone in his 
camp that whatever it takes to win is what will be employed, that 
the structure may endure but it can be altered on a per-game, per-case 
basis. The Falcons initially struggled. They were 1-7. But since then 
they are 9-3. Thus, Reeves in his first 20 games is even at 10-10. 
Beating the Giants would be a start for Reeves getting over the hump. 
``We are a long, long, long way from where we want to be,'' Reeves 
said. ``But the attitude is being developed where we now expect to 
win instead of expecting to lose. That is a big change.'' On offense, 
quarterback Chris Chandler is 10-4 in games he has finished; when 
healthy, he produces. Chandler has thrown a touchdown pass in a club-record 
16 consecutive games. Jamal Anderson gives the Falcons' running game 
bite: in his last two games, he rushed for 123 yards against San Francisco 
and for 117 against Carolina. On defense, the Falcons feature linebacker 
Jessie Tuggle, tackle Travis Hall and cornerback Ray Buchanan among 
their leaders. This defense has not allowed a 100-yard rusher in 12 
consecutive games. (Only Jacksonville has a longer streak, at 16.) 
All of the Falcons players stroll into Giants Stadium knowing what 
this game means to Dan Reeves. Of course he wants to dust the Giants. 
He wants to show them that they made a mistake by not insuring that 
he remain. He wants to remind them that there are reasons he has the 
most victories among current NFL coaches. He wants to keep building 
in Atlanta and heap more misery on the now struggling Giants. Reeves 
said: ``Anybody wants this in their situation. If you do not succeed, 
it is nice to know that it is nobody's fault but your own.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>