<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Michael Eisner, the chairman of Disney, goes to La Grenouille, 
he doesn't look at the menu. Doesn't have to. The chef, Daniel Orr, 
designs a meal for him that is, unlike almost everything else on the 
menu, fat free. And when Ronald Perelman, the chairman of Revlon, 
dines at Harry Cipriani, he almost always has roasted halibut served 
with a slab of tomato, capers and oregano. It is prepared for him 
alone. At the same restaurant, Oscar de la Renta, the clothing designer, 
orders riso alla valenziana, a rice dish with saffron and shrimp, 
every single time. Never mind that it doesn't happen to be on the 
menu. In fact, that may be the point, as some restaurant observers 
believe: Treat the royalty royally and they will return time and again, 
adding a less than subtle glitz to the restaurant's cachet. Just think 
of Le Cirque 2000, which often feels like a celebrity cafeteria. The 
Maccioni family learned this trick long ago. Of course, food isn't 
everything. Some affluent diners apparently go to a restaurant more 
to soak up the ambiance _ or perhaps for the sake of their guests 
_ than for their own gustatory needs: One publisher, for instance, 
has been known to have a lunch at the Four Seasons that consisted 
of a plain baked potato and nothing else. It might well be the most 
expensive baked potato in New York. That off-the-menu request is not 
a phenomenon either welcomed or admired by some chefs _ who, of course, 
pride themselves on their carefully designed menus _ or by some customers, 
who find it boorish. Daniel Boulud, for instance, is responsive to 
the unusual requests of his true regulars _ the people who, he says, 
treat his restaurant like an extension of home. (He has even made 
what he calls a ``golf club salad'' filled with raw vegetables for 
a couple who come every week.) He doesn't tolerate such requests from 
newcomers. ``We don't want to build a relationship with a customer 
who doesn't appreciate our food in the first place,'' he said. Some 
restaurateurs are even less tolerant. ``People don't come to Savoy 
so we can be their personal caterer,'' said Peter Hoffman, the owner 
of the SoHo restaurant. ``We don't promote that, and our customers 
aren't those kinds of people. They're not the finicky, limited palate 
kind of people.'' And Bill Blass, the designer, who admits to making 
modest off-the-menu requests, finds that the increasing desire for 
pampering by some diners can reach the point where it's offensive 
and pretentious. ``You're in the hands of people who know what they're 
doing,'' he said. ``You put yourself in their hands. Otherwise stay 
home and boil an egg.'' In any event, when you enter a restaurant 
of any reputation these days, it's a pretty good bet that some of 
the diners aren't eating anything you've learned about from the menu 
or the waiter. Michael Batterberry, a food historian and the editor 
of Food Arts magazine, said that today's special treatment in restaurants 
is rooted in practices of the past, when to bring in business, chefs 
would create and name dishes for a celebrity. Peach Melba, for instance, 
was named for Nellie Melba, the legendary soprano, and so was Melba 
toast. Now it's individual treatment that does the trick _ or maybe 
we just have too many celebrities today for the name game. Fame isn't 
a prerequisite for privilege. Just establish yourself as a regular. 
If you do so at Montrachet, the restaurant will add your name to a 
file listing foods you like and dislike. ``For instance,'' said Eric 
Rota, the maitre d'hotel there: ``Mrs. Simon is coming tomorrow, and 
we know she loves lobster. So we will send her an hors d'oeuvre of 
lobster.'' To speed up acceptance, it may be a good idea to say the 
word ``truffles'' or ``foie gras'' every time your waiter passes to 
make sure it sinks in. Scores of dishes are kept on hand only for 
these regulars. Like the Basque lobster salad at Gertrude's. So many 
regular customers have asked for it since it was taken off the menu 
that the chef now keeps poached lobsters in the refrigerator. (As 
a new customer though, I ran into determined resistance and discovered 
I had to be extremely insistent with the waiter to get it.) At Manducatis 
in Long Island City, Queens, regular customers know to ask for the 
pappardelle alla nonna, a hearty dish of pasta with cannellini beans 
and tomato. But dining off the menu at the restaurant goes beyond 
asking for specific dishes. ``We have a lot of what we call suggestion 
people,'' said Anthony Cerbone, the manager. ``They don't even look 
at the menu.'' La Grenouille, which has been open for 36 years, has 
built up a hefty repertory of classics. Though many of the Careme-style 
dishes are down and have been discreetly removed from the menu, they 
are not yet out. Longtime customers still hanker for roasted oysters 
with champagne sauce, poularde pochee, a poached chicken served with 
horseradish and vegetables, and even calves' brains. So Orr, the chef, 
makes sure they get them. Some requests are not so lofty. Ed Green, 
a voice-over specialist and regular at Chianti, worked over the waiters 
and the chef at the restaurant so much, that they now keep a container 
of ``Eddie's dressing'' in the refrigerator at all times _ a honey 
mustard concoction that is used just for his salads. It's official: 
Green has gained a toehold into the world of privilege. Ivan Benjamin 
Jr., a portfolio manager at a New York investment bank, who dines 
frequently at Oceana, has his own way of finagling dishes not on the 
menu. ``First of all, you have to be real low key,'' he said. ``You 
have to ask in a very subtle way with a smile. Tell them the restaurant 
is the best and that this is the only place you can get it. You have 
to make them feel special.'' He is sure it helps to ask someone at 
the management or ownership level. ``If you get an ordinary waiter 
or waitress, let me tell you, what do they have to gain?'' he said. 
So far, it has worked for him. The cooks at Oceana serve Benjamin 
his beloved salmonburgers, which are not on the menu. ``They only 
make them for me,'' he said. ``I'm the king.'' It takes some clout, 
or some nerve, to ask for a dish not on the menu, which is why most 
New York restaurantgoers will never eat the roasted oysters with Champagne 
sauce at La Grenouille (an old-time classic). Or the pappardelle with 
white beans and tomato at Manducatis (you have to know about it to 
ask for it). Or the Basque lobster salad at Gertrude's (a favorite 
with the regulars). But you can make them all at home, no request 
required. LOBSTER SALAD BASQUE STYLE Adapted from Gertrude's Time: 
2 hours 15 minutes 16 quail eggs Sea salt or kosher salt 4 lobsters, 
about 1 pound each 2 tablespoons duck fat, or butter 6 ounces Bayonne 
ham, cut in strips 1/4 inch thick by 1/4 inch wide 2 red bell peppers, 
halved, seeded and thinly sliced 2 green bell peppers, halved, seeded 
and thinly sliced 1 Spanish onion, halved and thinly sliced 4 garlic 
cloves, peeled and sliced 6 tomatoes, peeled, seeded and thinly sliced 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh thyme 1/2 teaspoon Spanish piments d'espelettes 
powder (see note) or 1 teaspoon minced fresh jalapeno pepper Freshly 
ground black pepper 1 teaspoon tomato paste 2 teaspoons sherry wine 
vinegar 3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil 4 handfuls mesclun greens 
4 fresh basil leaves, torn into pieces. 1. Fill a medium pan with 
water, and bring to a boil. Add the quail eggs, and simmer for 1 1/2 
minutes. Transfer the eggs to a bowl of ice water to stop the cooking. 
When cool, peel. Cover, and refrigerate until needed. 2. Bring a large 
pot of water to a boil, and add about 2 teaspoons of salt. Add lobsters, 
and cook for 12 minutes. Remove from water, and allow to cool completely. 
Pull off the tails, and remove the meat from the shells; reserve the 
remainder of the lobster for another use. Cover, and refrigerate the 
meat from the tails until needed. 3. Stew the peppers. In a large 
saute pan over medium-low heat, heat the duck fat, and add the ham. 
Saute until lightly browned, 3 to 4 minutes. Add red bell pepper, 
green bell pepper, onion and garlic, and saute until slightly softened, 
about 5 minutes. Add tomatoes and thyme. Cover, and cook for 30 minutes, 
stirring at times. Add water if needed; there should be a few tablespoons 
of liquid. Add piments d'espelettes powder or jalapeno, and salt and 
pepper. Saute for 1 minute. Remove from heat. Allow to cool completely, 
then cover, and refrigerate until chilled, at least 1 hour. 4. For 
the dressing, combine 2 tablespoons of pepper stewing liquid, tomato 
paste, vinegar, salt and pepper in a small bowl. Slowly whisk in oil. 
In a large bowl, combine mesclun greens and basil. Add 2 tablespoons 
of dressing, and toss to coat the leaves. 5. To serve, spoon about 
1 1/2 tablespoons of stewed peppers in the center of each of four 
plates. Lean a lobster tail on the peppers, and spoon remaining dressing 
on the meat. Place a handful of greens closely around and partly on 
the lobster. Place 4 quail eggs on the outer edges of the plate, and 
drizzle the remaining dressing around the plate. Yield: 4 servings. 
Note: Piments d'espelettes powder may be ordered from S.O.S. Chefs 
of New York, (212) 826-6514; 4 ounces, $8.50. ROASTED MALPECQUE OYSTERS 
WITH CHAMPAGNE Adapted from La Grenouille Time: 1 1/2 hours Sea salt 
2 medium leeks, white and light green parts only, very thinly sliced 
24 Malpecque or other meaty oysters, scrubbed well 4 shallots, roughly 
chopped 1 clove garlic, roughly chopped 5 black peppercorns, crushed 
6 mushrooms, finely chopped 3 sprigs fresh thyme 1 bay leaf 1 cup 
brut Champagne or sparkling wine 1 cup fish stock or clam juice 1 
cup heavy cream Juice of 1/2 lemon Freshly ground black pepper 2 egg 
yolks. 1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add 1 teaspoon of 
salt and the leeks. Blanch the leeks until tender, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Drain, then rinse with very cold water, then drain again. Set aside. 
2. Open the oysters, and remove them from their shells, reserving 
all their liquid. Set aside the bottom cuplike portion of each shell, 
and discard the flat top. 3. To make the sauce, combine the oysters 
and their liquid in a medium saute pan. Place over medium-high heat 
until the edges of the oysters begin to curl, 1 to 2 minutes; do not 
overcook. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the oysters to a small bowl. 
Continue to cook the oyster liquid until it has been reduced to 1 
or 2 tablespoons. Remove the liquid from the heat, and set it aside. 
4. In a medium saucepan, combine shallots, garlic, peppercorns, mushrooms, 
thyme, bay leaf, Champagne, fish stock and reduced oyster liquid. 
Place the saucepan over medium heat, and bring to a boil. Reduce heat 
to medium-low, and simmer until reduced and thickened enough to coat 
the back of a spoon, 15 or 20 minutes. Add the cream, and bring back 
to a boil. Reduce heat to low, and simmer until the sauce is again 
reduced by half, about 15 minutes. 5. Pour the sauce through a fine 
strainer into a bowl; discard the solids. Add lemon juice, and salt 
and pepper to taste. Place the egg yolks in a medium bowl. While whisking 
vigorously, add about 1/2 cup of the sauce to the yolks. Pour the 
yolk mixture back into the bowl of sauce, and set aside. 6. Heat oven 
to 500 degrees. Place oyster shells on a cookie sheet, and place one 
oyster in each shell. Divide the leeks equally over the oysters, and 
season with salt and pepper to taste. Divide the sauce equally among 
the shells, pouring it over the leeks. Roast the oysters until hot 
and browned on top, 8 to 10 minutes. If the oysters are hot but not 
browned, they may be placed under a hot broiler for 1 minute. Serve 
six oysters to a person on oyster plates or on flat plates, using 
seaweed, rock salt or watercress to steady them. Yield: 6 servings. 
PAPPARDELLE WITH WHITE BEANS AND TOMATOES Adapted from Manducatis 
Time: 2 1/2 hours, plus overnight soaking of beans 2 cups (1 pound) 
dried cannellini beans 1/2 cup extra virgin olive oil 4 cloves garlic, 
chopped 3 ripe tomatoes, cut into quarters 5 large basil leaves, torn 
into large pieces Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper 1 pound 
pappardelle Crushed red pepper flakes. 1. Rinse the beans, and place 
in a large bowl with 6 cups of water. Soak them overnight. 2. Drain 
the beans, place in a large pot, and cover with 6 cups of cold water. 
Bring to a boil over high heat, then reduce heat, and simmer until 
tender, about 1 1/2 to 2 hours. Drain, and set aside. 3. Bring a large 
pot of water to a boil for the pasta. In a large saute pan over medium-low 
heat, combine oil and garlic. Saute the garlic until golden but not 
browned, 1 to 2 minutes. Add tomatoes and basil, reduce heat to low, 
and saute until the tomatoes are slightly softened, about 2 to 3 minutes. 
Add the beans, and stir to combine. Season to taste with salt and 
pepper. Remove from heat, and keep warm. 4. Cook the pasta in boiling 
water until al dente, about 8 to 11 minutes. Drain well. Add the bean 
mixture to the pasta, and toss to combine well. Season to taste with 
salt, pepper and crushed red pepper. Serve immediately. Yield: 4 to 
6 servings. RICE PILAF VALENZIANA Adapted from Harry Cipriani Time: 
1 hour 1 red bell pepper, halved and seeded 3 1/2 cups chicken broth 
4 tablespoons unsalted butter 1 small onion, peeled and halved 2 cups 
short-grain rice, preferably carnaroli, vialone nano or Arborio Kosher 
salt 1/2 cup extra virgin olive oil 1 garlic clove, peeled and lightly 
crushed 1/2 pound shiitake mushrooms, thinly sliced 1 pound medium 
shrimp, shelled, deveined and cut in half 2 tablespoons chopped parsley 
2 tablespoons brandy 1/3 cup canned crushed tomatoes 1/2 teaspoon 
curry powder Pinch of powdered saffron 1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper 
Freshly ground black pepper. 1. Heat a broiler with a rack 3 inches 
from the heating element. Place the pepper halves, cut side down, 
on a baking sheet, and broil until the entire pepper surface is blackened. 
Put the pepper into a small paper bag, and fold the top to seal. Leave 
the peppers in the bag until cool, 20 to 30 minutes. Peel the peppers, 
and cut into 1/2 inch dice. Reserve. 2. Heat the oven to 350 degrees. 
In a medium saucepan, bring the chicken broth to a boil; then, reduce 
the heat to low and keep the broth at a simmer. 3. In a large casserole 
or Dutch oven over medium heat, melt the butter. Add onion, and saute 
until the surface is slightly softened but not browned, about 4 minutes. 
Add rice, and stir for about 2 minutes. Add the simmering broth, and 
salt to taste. Raise the heat to bring to a boil, then remove from 
heat. Cover the pan with a sheet of foil, and top with the lid. Place 
in the oven, and bake for 11 minutes. 4. While the rice is baking, 
place a large saute pan over medium heat, and add olive oil. Add garlic, 
saute for 30 seconds, then remove and discard it. Add mushrooms, and 
saute until they are lightly browned and the liquid has evaporated, 
about 4 minutes. Add shrimp and reserved red bell pepper. Saute to 
sear the shrimp, about 2 minutes. Stir in parsley. Add brandy, and 
carefully light with a match. Swirl the pan until the flames die out. 
Add crushed tomatoes, curry, saffron, cayenne and black pepper to 
taste. Season to taste with salt. Saute for 1 minute more. 5. Add 
the mushroom mixture to the pan of baked rice, and toss to combine 
well. Serve immediately. Yield: 6 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>