<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Alfred Hitchcock, as is well known, gave the playful name McGuffin 
to the element in a movie's plot that propels the action. A McGuffin 
can be one of two types, an event that unleashes a series of subsequent 
events (as in ``Strangers on a Train'') or (as in, say, ``Frenzy'' 
or ``Psycho'') a secret, a mystery, that must be revealed by the end. 
Either way, the unfolding of the intrigue must follow logically from 
the McGuffin, as it always did in Hitchcock. Things made sense. What 
if they don't? The question is relevant because more and more, it 
would seem, thrillers, however technically brilliant, do not make 
sense _ or, at least, do not flow from a tight interior logic. Well, 
call me a pedant, but my reaction to a thriller that fails logically 
is always disappointment, a sense of having been cheated. I would 
appeal for good old logical consistency, a high level of plausibility, 
as a necessary ingredient in thrillers, in movies as well as in books 
(where the same problem exists). A thriller should be a dramatic intensification 
of the possible as well as a tightly constructed puzzle. Even if the 
tale is farfetched, it needs to follow logically from its own premise 
and and give the appearance of something that could happen in the 
real world. If a thriller is unmoored from a sense of the possible, 
it loses the capacity to inspire the dread that makes both for suspense 
and intellectual coherence. The current example of a movie with logical 
gaps as big as Manhattan is the much-acclaimed box office hit ``Ronin,'' 
directed by John Frankenheimer and starring Robert De Niro. As Anthony 
Lane of The New Yorker wrote, ``Ronin'' has three of the best car 
chase scenes of recent years. Lane also allows that there are some 
``loose ends,'' but he treats them, as other critics do, as minor 
flaws in what he regards as a basically good work. I agree that ``Ronin'' 
is good in many ways. But my overall reaction was to feel let down, 
to believe that what could have been a tingling entertainment, like 
Frankenheimer's masterpiece, ``The Manchurian Candidate,'' was ruined 
by its absence of logic. ``Ronin'' involves a group of former intelligence 
agents from various countries who take on a lucrative freelance assignment 
consisting of stealing a mysterious metallic suitcase from its well-armed 
owners. The suitcase stealers, the Ronin of the title, proceed to 
perpetrate mayhem and murder as they carry out their task. The suitcase 
is also sought by shadowy groups of Irish terrorists and of unidentified 
Russians who have planted secret agents among the Ronin. Indeed, these 
groups will stop at nothing to recover the object, whose original 
owners, by the way, are equally determined to hold on to it. The idea 
of several secretly competing groups, of three different levels of 
betrayal, is marvelous, and it leads to a great deal of action-filled 
skulduggery. But a fundamental question remains unanswered. What, 
as the De Niro character asks several times, is in the suitcase? We 
never find that out. Does it matter? Clearly a lot of people, including 
most of the critics, don't think it does, and they give essentially 
two reasons. One is that the De Niro character, as it turns out, doesn't 
really care about the suitcase after all. He is really interested 
in infiltrating the Irish group so that he can eliminate an Irish 
terrorist standing in the way of the negotiations in Northern Ireland. 
This, of course, leaves a gaping question: Why, if the suitcase was 
so important to the Irish and the Russians, are the Americans indifferent 
to it? But never mind. The second, more important argument is that 
the heart of the movie lies in the layers of distrust and betrayal 
among the Ronin, while all else is relatively unimportant. Lane found 
it refreshing that, as he put it, the McGuffin turns out to be a question 
of lost luggage. That it is not some standard, overworked thriller 
device _ a lode of enriched uranium, for example _ gives it a witty 
post-modernist touch. It is as if Frankenheimer is saying, We are 
going to create a cinema of absolute purity, free of the drag and 
dross of a conventional McGuffin. That is a strong argument, but a 
thriller without a real McGuffin is like a placebo, a pill with no 
real chemical effect. Another problem is that much of the action in 
``Ronin,'' from its small gestures to the way it solves its own puzzle, 
seems both illogical and unrealistic. The bits and pieces of illogic 
accumulate, turning the film into a kind of gritty fairy tale full 
of automobile acrobatics but depriving it of a machine with working 
parts. Why, in the opening scene, for example, does the De Niro character 
hide his gun or go to inspect the men's room? He does these things 
for no reason other than the director's interest in creating a sense 
of foreboding, but without plausible reasons emerging for his behavior, 
the foreboding is contrived. Another example: People are always going 
into hiding in this movie, and they are always found effortlessly, 
as if by magic, by those looking for them. At one point, three of 
the dramatis personae get hold of the suitcase and disappear in Paris. 
The De Niro character and his partner (played by Jean Reno), still 
in the south of France, go to a mysterious French former agent living 
in a gated chateau, where he spends his time making miniature models 
of famous Japanese battle scenes. ``I'll find them for you,'' he tells 
the defeated pair and, sure enough, presto! Next scene: The De Niro 
character and his partner are staking out the battered Parisian hideaway. 
``Ronin'' is certainly not unusual in this absence of connective tissue. 
I am not speaking of the unserious thrillers, like the ``Lethal Weapon'' 
series, that dispense even with the pretense of logical plausibility, 
but of serious thrillers like, say, ``The Peacemaker,'' which is full 
of political absurdities and unexplained occurrences. In ``The Peacemaker,'' 
for example, a Serb extremist is pushed to an act of nuclear terrorism 
because his family is gunned down before his eyes in ``sniper alley'' 
in Sarajevo during the Bosnian civil war. No critic whom I read felt 
it worthy of note that in reality the Serbs were the snipers of sniper 
alley. The Muslims were generally the victims. Whatever other qualities 
of excitement or drama these movies may have, the absence of logic, 
their disconnection from real-world plausibility, deprives them of 
the essential ingredient of satisfying suspense. When writers and 
directors have recourse to what are essentially magical interventions, 
they might as well be making Road Runner cartoons. You need an escape 
from an impasse? Have the Road Runner paint a tunnel on the side of 
the cliff. You need to find some disappeared rivals? Turn to some 
savant who makes toy soldiers in a castle, and he will do the job 
without providing a hint to the viewer of how the feat was accomplished. 
And to require recourse to a magic wand is the cinematic equivalent 
of defying the laws of gravity. It helps to get the moviemaker to 
the next scene, but it leaves the audience with its feet suspended 
in midair. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>