<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0199 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eighty years ago, when Richard Colburn was growing up on a farm in 
what was then still the sleepy seaside town of San Diego, his mother 
surprised him on his seventh birthday with a violin case and a bow 
and took him to have his first lesson. It was given by a neighbor 
who advertised ``instruction in violin, piano, banjo, guitar, mandolin 
and something else.'' ``Insofar as I know and remember, I never expressed 
any interest in taking music lessons at all, let alone the violin,'' 
Colburn recalled the other day, eyes twinkling from between the pink 
crinkles of his cheery face. ``But she thought every person should 
be exposed to music.'' Mrs. Colburn's insistence paid off, and not 
just because her son switched instruments to become a middling amateur 
violist, who still takes a month each year to play chamber music, 
sometimes in the company of the world's best artists. He also became 
a demi-billionaire businessman who for the last 18 years has been 
the principal patron of a respected music education program for young 
people here. Now Colburn's lifelong passion has taken on far grander 
proportions. Sunday, the new $28 million home of the Colburn School 
of Performing Arts, which he financed, will be officially dedicated 
on a site a block from the Los Angeles Music Center and across the 
street from the future home of the Walt Disney Concert Hall. Since 
midsummer, the new building has been used by nearly 1,000 after-school 
and summertime students from age 2{ to adults, mostly in music but 
also in dance and drama. The building, designed by the New York and 
Los Angeles firm of Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates, has a facade 
of Roman brick dominated by the giant sloping zinc-shingled roof of 
the 416-seat concert hall. But even as its new home opens, school 
officials are putting the final touches on a plan to use $150 million 
of Colburn's money to expand it by adding a four-year, tuition-free 
college-level conservatory for 120 to 140 students. The project is 
aimed at rounding out a local ``cultural corridor'' and rivaling established 
national institutions like the Juilliard School in New York and the 
Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia. ``It is one of the primary 
pre-college experiences in California for music,'' said Juilliard 
president Joseph Polisi, referring to the existing program. The expansion 
will have a substantial national impact, he added. ``Quite honestly, 
any institution that plans to do what Colburn says he wants to do 
will be great for the serious music environment in this country,'' 
said Polisi, who years ago as a student bassoonist at Yale played 
in a chamber concert at Colburn's house in Beverly Hills. ``Sure, 
there's competition for the very best talent. But even more important, 
if we can get institutions of high quality, that's a plus for everybody.'' 
Historically, Polisi noted, conservatories like Juilliard and Curtis 
have been started by wealthy individuals, but Colburn officials could 
point to only one other _ the Harid Conservatory in Boca Raton, Fla. 
_ that has been founded in the last 50 years. They are well aware 
of the challenge. ``The idea is not to reinvent the wheel, but to 
learn from the mistakes of the past and incorporate the best,'' said 
Joseph J. Thayer, a French-horn player who has been the dean of the 
65-member Colburn faculty dean since 1983. ``It's the most expensive 
kind of education, because it's all one-to-one instruction. And you 
don't get many research grants.'' Ernest Fleischmann, who retired 
this spring after 29 years as managing director of the Los Angeles 
Philharmonic, said that, along with Gordon Getty, Colburn was ``probably 
the single greatest benefactor of music and musicians in California'' 
and an ``iconoclast and individualist.'' Fleischmann called the planned 
conservatory ``an absolutely essential undertaking'' and added, ``It 
is what this part of the world has lacked for all these many years.'' 
For Colburn, it is all just the logical outgrowth of his own early 
experience with inadequate teaching that led him to abandon a potential 
musical career in favor of accounting and eventually investments in 
foundries, mining and construction equipment rentals. Colburn was 
chairman of U.S. Rentals, a Modesto, Calif.-based concern in which 
he owned two-thirds of the shares, until its $1 billion acquisition 
this summer by a rival, United Rentals Inc. of Greenwich, Conn. He 
has been listed as among the 30 richest people in Los Angeles, with 
a fortune estimated at $700 million. ``I was the victim of poor training 
myself, and still have not overcome the bad habits of early teaching,'' 
he said in an interview in an elegant office bungalow on the grounds 
of his sprawling Beverly Hills estate. The Colburn faculty includes 
master teachers like Ronald Leonard, principal cellist of the Los 
Angeles Philharmonic. ``Eastern schools have come out here and robbed 
us of our most promising students, even before they've finished their 
training at the Colburn School,'' he said. ``There was a time when 
Vienna was the world headquarters of medical studies. I hope the day 
will come that you don't have to say you went to Juilliard to establish 
your pedigree, that you can say you went to Colburn.'' What is new 
for Colburn is the publicity that comes with philanthropy on such 
a scale. Well known in the music world for his collection of 72 vintage-quality 
instruments, which he has lent to aspiring musicians around the world 
for the last 50 years, and for paying top-quality players to join 
him in amateur quartets, Colburn has remained, by choice, little known 
to the public. ``My father told me as a little boy, `Fools' names 
and fools' faces often appear in public places,''' said Colburn, who 
answers innocuous questions like ``What did your parents do?'' with 
impish but unrevealing answers like ``They raised three lovely boys.'' 
Asked how he acquired his fortune, Colburn replied with a stream of 
cryptic Ben Franklinisms: ``A penny saved is a penny earned; waste 
not, want not. You've heard some of those?'' ``I never created anything,'' 
he added modestly. ``I identified dogs, and I got people to run them.'' 
After dropping out of college and working as an accountant in Chicago 
in his 20s, Colburn moved into investment banking. More than 30 years 
ago, by then back in California, he helped rescued Susquehanna Corp., 
a Denver-based conglomerate with interests in building materials and 
uranium mining. At 87, Colburn is clearly a character, turned out 
for an interview in soft, custom-made clothes with a gold watch fob 
tucked in his tweed lapel and jokingly offering a visitor vodka at 
midday. He has been married nine times, to eight women, most recently 
in June, and he and his 38-year-old wife, Jacqueline, have just returned 
from Austria with their newborn daughter, his sixth child. For each 
of the last 29 summers he has taken a house in Salzburg for the international 
music festival there, and has served as president of its American 
friends organization. He has also been a longtime patron of the Metropolitan 
Opera in New York and the Los Angeles Opera. The school began life 
in 1950 as the preparatory division of the University of Southern 
California's School of Music, and its alumni include Michael Tilson 
Thomas, the music director of the San Francisco Symphony, and principal 
players in orchestras in Cincinnati, Cleveland, Philadelphia and New 
York. In 1980 the university decided it could no longer afford the 
school, and Colburn stepped in anonymously to keep it going, in an 
former warehouse on the fringes of the campus in south central Los 
Angeles. In 1986, he allowed his name to be placed on the school. 
In 1980 Colburn also recruited Toby Mayman, a former congressional 
aide and the wife of one of his business colleagues at Susquehanna, 
as the school's executive director, a job she retains. But now she 
presides over the spanking new building on Grand Avenue in the heart 
of downtown, with 67 pianos, a library of 6,000 compact disks, 20 
state-of-the-art acoustic practice rooms and recording equipment, 
28 teaching studios, 2 dance studios and a 100-seat recital hall named 
for . . . Toby Mayman. The building was designed so it could be expanded 
farther down Bunker Hill into vacant land that now holds a parking 
lot, with room to build a 10-story dormitory complex for the future 
conservatory students. An open plaza connects the new school with 
the Museum of Contemporary Art next door. ``It had kind of a schizophrenic 
requirement, because on the one hand it will be used by professional 
chamber musicians for concerts and on the other it really is a school 
and will be used by children,'' said the project's architect, Norman 
Pfeiffer. ``Trying to come to terms with the appropriate architectural 
response to that wide diversity of audience made it interesting. You 
didn't want to make it seem like an elementary school or a kindergarten.'' 
A program of daytime classes for adults has already lured workers 
from the downtown area, including U.S. District Court Judge Stephen 
Wilson, who comes to take noontime jazz piano lessons with David Scott 
of the Colburn faculty. ``I really like it,'' Wilson said in a telephone 
interview. I've never had any serious training, but I've had a proclivity 
for it, and I sort of taught myself. Unfortunately, I've now learned 
that a lot of what I had been doing was wrong, and it's difficult 
to unlearn things. It's like a golfer who's hitting in the 90s and 
wants to get down to the 80s, and the pro shows him what he's doing 
wrong and with the new grip he's suddenly hitting in the hundreds. 
I'm not quite as facile with this new technique yet.'' For his part, 
though he especially favors chamber music, Colburn declined to characterize 
his musical tastes, or even name a handful of favorite pieces or composers. 
``My favorites are what I'm listening to,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>