<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0334 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the House prepares to vote Thursday on launching an impeachment 
inquiry, Democratic leaders labored on Tuesday to keep as many embattled 
Democrats as possible from voting for the Republican proposal. Leaders 
and Judiciary Committee members met throughout the day to weigh a 
Democratic alternative they plan to offer this week, and to consider 
bringing it closer to the Republican version in hopes of appealing 
to a large bloc of nervous and angry moderates. But by nightfall, 
it appeared that they were leaning against that approach and preferring 
to stay with a proposal Democrats offered Monday in the Judiciary 
Committee. Whatever approach they chose, the White House was still 
bracing for the desertions by anywhere from two dozen to several dozen 
Democrats. The greater the level of defection, the harder it will 
be to scoff at the vote as a partisan vendetta. House Democratic leaders, 
more concerned about their followers than their president, were seeking 
a way to enable the rank and file to say they voted for a reasonable 
proposal, but opposed a Republican witchhunt. The Republican plan, 
adopted Monday in the Judiciary Committee, had no time limit on the 
inquiry and did not limit its focus to the possible charges recommended 
by Kenneth Starr, the Whitewater independent counsel, who dealt only 
with President Clinton's attempts to conceal his relationship with 
Monica Lewinsky. Committee Democrats sought to set a Thanksgiving 
deadline and bar the consideration of additional issues. The possible 
revisions being floated include extending the Thanksgiving deadline 
until the end of December, and specifically allowing for the consideration 
of any new referrals from the independent counsel, Democratic officials 
said. For some Democrats, the idea of softening the alternative could 
sweeten the pot. ``I'm trying to avoid polarizing this thing as a 
political decision, said Rep. David Minge, D-Minn. ``I'm searching 
for ways to accomplish that.'' But for others, the decision to vote 
for the Republican proposal is all but a foregone conclusion. ``I'm 
going to vote for an inquiry in order to move the process forward,'' 
said Rep. Chris John, D-La. ``My district has consistently wanted 
to move this along, and this is a way to do that.'' Rep. John M. Spratt 
Jr., D-S.C., who is in a tight race for re-election, said he favors 
an inquiry, but only one with a deadline and a limited scope. ``If 
the Democratic alternative fails, I've got a tough choice,'' said 
Spratt. ``I haven't ruled out for the Republican motion.'' All day, 
Democrats on the Judiciary Committee and Democratic whips tried to 
appeal to moderates by cautioning them that a vote for the Republican 
proposal would doom the House to a long, wide-ranging impeachment 
inquiry. But by evening, they seemed discouraged. At the same time, 
President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton and Vice President Al 
Gore placed a new round of phone calls to House Democrats, including 
some committee chairmen, to lobby them and to gauge the prevailing 
mood. Democratic officials said that they could lose as many as 80 
Democrats or as few as a dozen on the vote, depending on how invitingly 
they retool the party's alternative resolution. For their part, Republicans 
have said that as many as 100 Democrats could vote with them. But 
some on each side are playing the expectations game, hoping to argue 
that they did better than expected once the votes are cast. ``This 
vote is coming awfully close to an election and a lot of people are 
factoring that in,'' said a White House official. ``There will be 
a significant amount of people who will vote, not based on how they 
feel, but on how they expect it to impact in November.'' Further complicating 
matters for the White House and its allies, the Republican majority 
leader, Rep. Dick Armey of Texas, said on Tuesday that Democrats would 
not be allowed to offer their own proposal as a clear-cut substitute 
to the open-ended Republican proposal. Instead, Democrats will have 
to bring up their proposal under a parliamentary maneuver in which 
debate is limited to one hour. And Armey again raised the possibility 
that the inquiry's scope, under the direction of the Judiciary Committee 
chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, could broaden to include allegations 
and evidence from other investigations. On Thursday, the House Committee 
on Government Reform and Oversight, which is chaired by Rep. Dan Burton, 
R-Ind., is expected to vote to release its interim report on 1996 
Democratic campaign finance abuses. A Republican aide to the committee 
said there were no impeachable offenses in the findings, but at least 
one chapter of the report contained information ``salient'' to the 
Judiciary Committee's inquiry. The information deals mostly with ``White 
House stonewalling and the abuse of executive privilege,'' the aide 
said, noting that an estimated 80 witnesses took the Fifth Amendment 
or fled the country in order not to testify before the panel, the 
aide said. ``Let me remind you again, one of the of the patterns that 
we see, that I certainly see is stonewall, evasiveness, obstruction,'' 
Armey said. ``So I mean these things will be pursued by the committee.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>