<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0330 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton's parallel universes have been separated by a mere 
two miles the past several days, as international financial leaders 
assemble in downtown Washington hotels to address the spreading global 
crisis while Capitol Hill is consumed by debate over whether to impeach 
the president. Clinton this week convened the top financial policy 
makers of the leading economic powers to sound the alarm about the 
growing threat of a global recession. At the very moment on Monday 
evening that the House Judiciary Committee was completing its debate 
on authorizing an impeachment inquiry, Clinton was engaged in a dense 
discussion on market transparency, the legacy of Bretton Woods and 
the need for a new global financial ``architecture.'' ``He was very 
focused,'' said Sir Donald Tsang, the financial secretary of Hong 
Kong, who attended an emergency meeting of top economic officials 
called by Clinton on Monday night. ``He was the consummate moderator. 
He even picked up all of our odd jargon.'' In the Monday evening meeting 
at a Sheraton hotel here, Clinton assumed the role he has played often 
in international gatherings and round-table discussions at home _ 
the avid listener and synthesizer. In public, at least, the president 
betrayed no interest in or concern about the impeachment debate raging 
22 blocks to the east in the chamber of the House Judiciary Committee, 
a participant said. And well he might be focused on the threat of 
spreading global contagion _ the health of the American economy is 
one of the chief props supporting his continued public popularity. 
Were the market and financial troubles of Asia, Russia and now Latin 
America to drag down the domestic economy, Clinton could see his approval 
ratings quickly erode and the prospects of impeachment grow more serious. 
It was no coincidence that Clinton on Monday night seated himself 
between Robert Rubin, the treasury secretary, and Alan Greenspan, 
the Federal Reserve Board chairman. Rubin and Greenspan are given 
much of the credit for soothing American markets and containing inflation 
as stock exchanges and currencies around the globe have plummeted. 
If the rest of the world's troubles spread to the United States, even 
they may not be able to save the president. Clinton's focus on the 
world's economic troubles _ he has spoken on the matter almost every 
day for the past week _ carries a risk. If he cries ``fire'' and is 
then perceived as having done nothing to douse the flames, he could 
be seen as ineffective, crippled and distracted by his personal and 
political problems. The jarring juxtaposition of Clinton as leader 
of the global economy and defendant-in-chief left many of the visiting 
central bankers and finance ministers perplexed and frustrated. Among 
European officials, the spectacle of Congress considering impeachment 
while the world is looking to the United States for leadership in 
addressing the rapidly spreading financial crisis was disheartening. 
``The misperception here in town has to do with the impeachment process, 
which the world regards as something totally bizarre,'' said Stephan-Gotz 
Richter, the head of TransAtlantic Futures, a consulting firm in Washington. 
After speaking with European policy makers over the past several days, 
Richter said they ``feel Congress is going into a reckless mindset 
while the rest of the world is burning.'' Michel Camdessus, managing 
director of the International Monetary Fund, which is holding its 
annual meeting with its sister agency, the World Bank, here this week, 
alluded gently to Clinton's domestic problems in his address to delegates. 
He chided the United States for failing to fulfill its $18 billion 
pledge to the fund, making its job of rescuing struggling economies 
more difficult. ``In a world of rapid change,'' Camdessus said Tuesday, 
``in a world where sudden market developments can destabilize even 
well-performing economies, the fund needs adequate financing to perform 
its mandate fully.'' Alan Blinder, an economics professor at Princeton 
University and a former member of Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers, 
said foreign leaders were angry that Clinton and Congress were indulging 
in an obsession with private matters as millions of people around 
the world were watching their dreams of joining the middle class crumble. 
``The main view in the rest of world is they can't believe what the 
United States is putting itself through,'' Blinder said. ``They're 
looking with wonderment, bewilderment at what America is doing to 
itself and they can't understand why. ``Furthermore, they're angry 
with us. They all know if there's going to be any leadership in the 
world, it's going to come from the United States, and they see that 
getting extremely difficult. If the United States doesn't take the 
lead, nobody will.'' Clinton is clearly trying to provide that leadership, 
using his fabled ability to ``compartmentalize'' problems. As much 
of the nation was devouring the transcripts of the salacious and sophomoric 
Linda Tripp-Monica Lewinsky conversations, Clinton was trying to master 
the intricacies of hedge funds and cross-border capital flows. Congress, 
meanwhile, was engaged in a Jesuitical disputation on what does and 
does not constitute an impeachable offense. Up to now, Clinton has 
been able to temporarily wall off the threat of impeachment from the 
problems of the global economy, the midterm elections, Kosovo, the 
federal budget, the Iraqi nuclear threat and all the other troubles 
that land on his desk. But it is the nature of the presidency that 
he _virtually alone in the world _ has to worry about all of them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>