<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from statements Tuesday by President Clinton 
and the leaders of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, 
at the annual meeting of the two organizations: By President Clinton 
A half century ago, a visionary generation of leaders gathered at 
Bretton Woods to build a new economy to serve the citizens of every 
nation. In one of his last messages to Congress, President Franklin 
Roosevelt said that the creation of the International Monetary Fund 
and the World Bank, and I quote, ``spell the difference between a 
world caught again in the maelstrom of panic and economic warfare 
or a world in which nations strive for a better life through mutual 
trust, cooperation and assistance.'' . . . But now the health of Asia 
and indeed the world depends upon Japan. Just as the United States 
had to eliminate its deficits and high interest rates, which were 
taking money away from the rest of the world, over the last six years, 
now Japan must take strong steps to restart its economic growth by 
addressing problems in the banking system so that lending and investment 
can begin with renewed energy and by stimulating, deregulating and 
opening its economy. For all of us, there can be no substitute for 
action. By Michel Camdessus International Monetary Fund It would be 
perhaps too dramatic yet to talk of global recession, but the evidence 
of the risks calls for immediate action. Fortunately, in the industrial 
countries of North America and Europe the fundamentals remain sound. 
For some time, inflation has been subdued. Economic expansion continues 
in the United States, while in the economies of the euro area the 
recovery has continued to firm. But even North America and Europe 
are not immune, and effects of the crisis are beginning to be felt. 
It was therefore most appropriate that representatives of the industrial 
economies recently recognized the shift in the balance of risks from 
inflation to a slowdown in demand. ... If we expect any upturn next 
year, it will be because of the impressive steps by many countries, 
some of which were already implementing Fund-supported programs, to 
shield themselves against contagion. An example at the onset of the 
crisis was the Philippines, which was able to absorb the worst of 
te successive waves of contagion by prolonging and rapidly strengthening 
an existing successful Fund-supported program. The reaction of Latin 
American countries, so admirably illustrated by the remarks of President 
Menem, is also to be lauded. By jointly strengthening their defenses 
they have invited the markets to take greater account of the striking 
progress accomplished over the past decade and in particular since 
the Mexican crisis. They have created the conditions for the Fund 
to negotiate promptly its financial support, if necessary. By James 
Wolfensohn World Bank Twelve months ago there was optimism about Russia 
with its strong reformist team. And then came a year of turmoil and 
travail. East Asia _ where estimates suggest that more than 20 million 
people fell back into poverty last year, and where, at best, growth 
is likely to be halting and hesitant for several years to come. Russia, 
beset by economic and political crisis _ caught between two worlds, 
two systems, comfortable with neither. Japan, the world's second largest 
economy, so crucial to East Asian recovery, with a Government committed 
to economic reform, and yet still in recession, with a profound impact 
not just in Asia but around the world. Nuclear tests in India and 
Pakistan. War threatened in Eritrea and Ethiopia. Terrorist bombs 
in Kenya and Tanzania. ... We must address the issues of long-term 
equitable growth on which prosperity and human progress depend. We 
must focus on the institutional and structural changes needed for 
recovery and sustainable development. We must focus on the social 
issues. We must do all this. Because if we do not have the capacity 
to deal with social emergencies, if we do not have longer-term plans 
for solid institutions, if we do not have greater equity and social 
justice, there will be no political stability and without political 
stability no amount of money put together in financial packages will 
give us financial stability. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>