<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The financial bane of Detroit automakers has been the laggard shares 
of their stocks; those have tended to sell for only seven to nine 
times their earnings per share, less than half the market average 
for big companies. Investors have feared the American auto industry's 
reputation for faltering badly during each recession and have refused 
to pay higher multiples of earnings even as automakers have amassed 
huge cash reserves and cut their long-term costs. Last spring, Chrysler 
Corp., which has a particularly bad reputation for encountering trouble 
during recessions, seemed to have found a nifty way around investor 
distrust. It agreed to merge with Daimler-Benz AG, which has traded 
at a higher multiple in the German market, where investors have regarded 
auto stocks more favorably. When news of the merger broke on May 6, 
Chrysler's shares climbed to 9.5 times its expected 1998 earnings 
_ up from 8.1 times earnings the day before. Daimler's American depositary 
receipts rose to a price-earnings multiple of 25.8 from a multiple 
of 24.3. But those gains have proved temporary. While investment bankers 
and auto analysts still expect the deal to be completed, the weak 
performance of Chrysler's stock since May is an unusual example of 
the perils of an all-stock merger with a foreign company. Chrysler 
shares closed at $40.8125 Tuesday, down 62.5 cents from where they 
had been the day before news of the merger first surfaced six months 
ago. Chrysler's stock is now trading at 7.5 times the consensus forecast 
of its 1998 earnings, according to earnings estimates from First Call 
Corp., which tracks stock analyst opinions. Daimler's stock is now 
trading at 16.1 times its expected earnings this year, though a small 
part of its drop since May reflects the payment of a special dividend. 
Auto stocks have dropped since May, and German auto stocks in particular 
have suffered as consumer demand in Europe begins to weaken and the 
strengthening German mark of the last two weeks has eroded the value 
of car exports to the United States. Because the Chrysler-Daimler 
deal is a transaction in which both companies' stockholders exchange 
their shares for stock in a combined company, Daimler's difficulties 
combined with a fall in American auto stocks have left Chrysler's 
shares right back where they were before the deal was announced. Two 
weeks ago, Salomon Smith Barney lowered its rating on Daimler's stock 
to a buy from a strong buy, partly because the company's huge revenues 
from selling Mercedes cars in the United States were being hurt by 
the mark's growing strength. Since Chrysler's stock now moves in tandem 
with Daimler's stock, the recent weakness of the American dollar is 
thus hurting Chrysler _ a paradox for any American automaker, which 
normally tends to profit from a weak dollar. Chrysler's price-earnings 
multiple of 7.5 is now slightly less than Ford Motor Co.'s multiple 
of 7.9. The multiple for General Motors Corp. is 11.9 when calculated 
with its strike-depressed 1998 earnings, but only 6.5 when calculated 
with its expected 1999 earnings. Chrysler's stock now has the lowest 
average recommendation from analysts of any of the Big Three automakers, 
though the difference is fairly small, according to First Call. But 
anyone who believes that the combined company, DaimlerChrysler AG, 
will thrive should buy Chrysler stock rather than Daimler shares, 
said Mark Rowen, an analyst at Salomon Smith Barney. That's because 
Chrysler is selling at a 10 percent discount to Daimler, based on 
the conversion ratios used in the merger. There has been no sign that 
the problems at Chrysler and Daimler will derail the transaction, 
which has already been approved by both companies' shareholders and 
was always intended as a strategic move rather than as an outright 
sale of Chrysler. The only remaining step in the merger is for Daimler 
stockholders to tender their shares for exchange. If less than 90 
percent of the Daimler shares are submitted, the deal will receive 
less favorable tax treatment. But the fall in Daimler's stock since 
the merger announcement makes Chrysler more attractive to German shareholders 
and the merger even more likely to take place. A person involved in 
the merger said that there had been no discussions about reworking 
the terms of the deal. Hedge funds, traditionally active in arbitrage 
trading of merger stocks, appear to have suffered little harm from 
Chrysler's difficulties, said Tom Burnett, the director of Merger 
Insight, a New York firm that researches mergers for institutional 
clients. The reason is simple: Hedge funds tried to borrow Daimler 
stock and sell it short to protect themselves against any breakup 
of the deal. But few Daimler shareholders have been willing to lend 
their shares, preferring to keep them and exchange them for shares 
in the combined company. So hedge funds and other arbitragers have 
been cautious about holding Chrysler shares, Burnett said. Chrysler 
and Daimler are seeking to minimize taxes by treating the deal as 
a so-called pooling of interests. The rules for such transactions 
require Chrysler to undo the effects of its recent stock repurchases 
by selling 30 million shares _ an unenviable task in a market so weak 
that Goldman, Sachs just postponed its own plans to become a publicly 
traded company for fear that its newly issued shares would command 
a meager price. Chrysler's difficulties have attracted little comment 
on Wall Street, and its need to sell a lot of stock is part of the 
reason. Big investment banks are lining up to handle the transaction, 
particularly as other stock issuances are drying up, and the banks' 
analysts are reluctant to offend Chrysler by discussing its problems 
publicly. For now, the only automaker that seems to have found a way 
to push its price-earnings multiple out of line with the industry 
is Ford. The automaker posted a $15.95 billion one-time accounting 
gain in the first-quarter when it revalued its 80 percent stake in 
the Associates, a consumer-finance company, before spinning off its 
stake in the business to Ford shareholders. None of the analysts following 
Ford have included this non-cash gain in their calculations of the 
company's price-earnings multiple. But at least one financial information 
service does so, assigning a price-earnings multiple of less than 
3 to Ford as a result. Patricia Little, Ford's manager of corporate 
accounting and financial reporting, who calculated the one-time gain 
to comply with an obscure tax regulation, said that her role had prompted 
some jokes at the office, such as a suggestion that she deserved a 
raise. ``I sort of bragged to our CFO that I produced more earnings 
than anyone else in the company, but he didn't really buy that,'' 
she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>