<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0455 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
French tests appear to have found traces of chemicals linked to the 
nerve gas VX on Iraqi warheads, according to several weapons experts 
who said this would confirm earlier American test results. Several 
diplomats also charged that the French had delayed releasing the final 
results because they did not want to undermine Iraq's push at the 
United Nations this week to lift economic sanctions. French officials 
denied that they were deliberately withholding test results, and a 
French diplomat said on Tuesday that the results are expected to be 
``completely consistent'' with the earlier tests that found no traces 
of the chemical. Tension is mounting between the United Nations and 
Iraq, which has refused to cooperate with U.N. weapons inspectors 
and has sent a high-level team to the United Nations to argue that 
Iraq has released enough information about its weapons program to 
justify lifting sanctions. Iraq, which has denied putting VX on weapons, 
disputed earlier American test results finding traces of VX on warheads 
and asked for further tests, conducted in France and Switzerland over 
the summer. Preliminary French and Swiss test results found no traces 
of VX. But if final French tests do find VX components on the warheads, 
Iraq's credibility and case for lifting sanctions would be further 
weakened. France, which like Russia has considerable commercial interests 
in Iraq, has argued that the United Nations should move faster to 
ease sanctions imposed after the Gulf War. To begin lifting sanctions, 
all Iraqi biological, chemical and nuclear weapons, as well as certain 
missile systems, must be destroyed, and inspectors must be confident 
Iraq could not rebuild them. Several weapons experts said that during 
a technical meeting in September of international weapons specialists, 
French technical experts had said that four or five of the samples 
taken from chemical warheads had VX components on them. But at higher-level 
meetings later that month, these results were not discussed, according 
to diplomats and weapons inspectors. According to several diplomats, 
French Defense Ministry officials told European officials that this 
was too sensitive a time to publicize results that would be damaging 
to the Iraqis. The Iraqis, led by Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, 
say that there are no more prohibited weapons of any kind to be found 
and that the Security Council has a ``legal and moral'' obligation 
to lift sanctions. Inspectors reply that there are too many outstanding 
questions, and missing documentation, on issues like VX and a host 
of biological compounds to justify relaxing restrictions on President 
Saddam Hussein. On Tuesday, Aziz angrily lashed out at the United 
States and the weapons inspection system, suggesting that he was meeting 
resistance in both the secretary general's office and the Security 
Council in his demands for a new look at sanctions in return for Iraq 
permitting the resumption of on-site arms inspections, which Baghdad 
ended on Aug. 5. In a six-month report sent to the Security Council 
on Tuesday, Richard Butler, the chief of the program to inspect Iraqi, 
said that the Iraqis were close to meeting requirements in ballistic 
missile and chemical weapons programs. But it noted that ``the level 
of verification of precisely how much VX was produced by Iraq is not 
satisfactory.'' The report also noted that Baghdad continues to deny 
that it loaded warheads with VX, contrary to mounting evidence. The 
United States has also not submitted a second final report on the 
warhead samples, according to officials of the United Nations Special 
Commission, which is responsible for disarming Iraq and preventing 
it from rebuilding its weapons programs. It was the first American 
report, in June, that revealed the presence of components found in 
decomposed VX in missile warheads destroyed by Iraq and dug up in 
April by U.N. weapons inspectors. That report led to Iraqi demands 
for laboratory studies outside the United States. Tests in France 
and Switzerland followed in the summer. The Swiss tests, all agree, 
appear to be negative, with no traces of VX components found. Weapons 
experts and diplomats said on Tuesday that a technical team assembled 
in New York two weeks ago by the Special Commission, known as UNSCOM, 
expected to be able to discuss final results from Switzerland, the 
Untied States and France. The Americans and the French did not have 
results ready. Some diplomats accuse the United States of also withholding 
information because its scientists did not find VX components on its 
second batch of samples, so as not to cast doubt on its first tests. 
France told the UNSCOM technical experts that it had four or five 
more samples to test. On Tuesday, experts said that there is strong 
evidence that those outstanding samples had revealed two chemicals 
found in VX _ though not only in VX. But the Iraqis would be hard-pressed 
to explain what the chemicals were doing on warheads that Iraq said 
contained other substances. The Iraqis used Sarin gas in the 1980s 
in attacks on Iran and on their own Kurdish population. The French 
say that the results may be known in a matter of days. The Iraqi warheads 
being studied were discovered at a weapons-demolition site north of 
Baghdad. Commission officials haggled with Iraqis for weeks before 
being allowed to take some metal fragments from the shells out of 
the country in May for testing in the United States. ``Forty-four 
fragments were brought to the U.S. from the al-Hussein destruction 
site, a site where al-Hussein missiles were destroyed in Iraq, and 
they were analyzed using two scientific techniques,'' said Kenneth 
Bacon, the Pentagon spokesman, at a briefing for journalists on Sept. 
18. ``On about a quarter of those 44 fragments, the analysts found 
traces of decomposed VX.'' ``The results were then tested or reviewed 
by a special UNSCOM team,'' Bacon said. ``This is a team of 13 people 
from seven different countries appointed by UNSCOM to review the findings 
of the U.S. lab. That team included representatives from Switzerland, 
from France, from Russia and from China. The 13 people on that team 
unanimously concluded that the U.S. findings were valid.'' Other warhead 
fragments from the same site were stored in Iraq by the inspectors, 
but apparently in conditions that were less than optimal to preserve 
them. There is also some question whether Iraqis, who had access to 
the site, could have tampered with them. In any case, after experts 
at the American military laboratory at Aberdeen, Md., found VX traces 
on the shells and the Iraqis demanded another set of tests in Europe, 
the samples for the second round were taken from the fragments stored 
in the Iraqi warehouse. Furthermore, metal chunks were not removed 
from Iraq this time. Instead, 80 swabs were made on the surface of 
the metal and half were sent to France and half to Switzerland. American 
officials were concerned at the time that there seem to be no ``custodial 
command'' over the fragments left behind by UNSCOM, and no knowledge 
of what the Iraqis might have done with them. As a result, many questions 
surrounded the second set of tests even before reports began to emanate 
from Europe and from the Arab press saying that the Swiss and French 
had found no VX. At the Pentagon, Bacon said that whatever the results 
from Europe, those findings did not contradict the American conclusion. 
``Based on that, the question became not whether Iraq had attempted 
to weaponize VX but how many warheads it had weaponized with VX,'' 
he said. ``What we're dealing with here is something like an archeological 
site. It's a large area with thousands and thousands of little fragments 
that have been collected and taken to a warehouse. These are fragments 
of missiles that the Iraqis have destroyed themselves. ``So it's like 
if you were trying to analyze different types of grass in a large 
field,'' Bacon said. ``You might find bluegrass in one corner of the 
field and zoysia grass in another corner of the field. Just because 
you find zoysia grass in the northwest corner of the fields doesn't 
mean that Kentucky bluegrass or fescue wasn't growing in the southeast 
corner. So that's where the situation stands.'' In Geneva on Tuesday, 
a senior American arms control official said that Iraq could reconstitute 
its chemical and biological weapons programs in a short period of 
time, and he urged that spot inspections be resumed as soon as possible. 
John Holum, acting under secretary of state for arms control and international 
security affairs, said that the Security Council should not agree, 
as the Iraqis demand, to a timetable for lifting sanctions. ``They 
were designed to be lifted when Iraq satisfied the international community,'' 
he said at a news conference. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>