<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration on Tuesday intensified its threat to use 
force against Yugoslav military and police as diplomacy continued 
to try to persuade President Slobodan Milosevic to end his crackdown 
in Kosovo and to maintain NATO unity behind military action. In a 
letter to NATO's 15 other members over the weekend, Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright urged the allies to take the next step and vote 
to give NATO's commanders the authority to use force. But some of 
the allies have resisted that step; a vote, which was to take place 
in Brussels on Wednesday, has now been delayed to the end of the week 
at the earliest. The Europeans allies are insisting that NATO make 
another effort to persuade Russia to go along with the possibility 
of NATO intervention in the former Yugoslavia. Russia on Tuesday vowed 
to veto any attempt by the United Nations Security Council to authorize 
the strikes, warning of ``serious international consequences'' if 
NATO used force without such authority. The Europeans are prepared 
to risk a Russian veto, but want to avoid one if possible. They do 
not want to stir up Russian anger at NATO, and in addition the Russians 
may be in a position to influence the Serbs, with whom they have friendly 
ties. The United States has argued that NATO has the legal right to 
intervene in Kosovo because the fighting there is a threat to European 
stability. The NATO allies remain concerned, however, about the lack 
of clear legal authority for a military attack against a sovereign 
country trying to suppress an insurrection within its borders. While 
the debate goes on internationally, there is disagreement even within 
the administration about how best to pursue and ultimately enforce 
a resolution to end Milosevic's crackdown in Kosovo. The rift emerged 
over the possible use of American ground forces to enforce any cease-fire 
in Kosovo. Secretary of Defense William Cohen told the Senate's Armed 
Services Committee that he opposed placing American troops on the 
ground in Kosovo, though he said some sort of international force 
might be necessary to ensure stability. That puts him at odds with 
Albright and other members of the administration, who did not rule 
out the use of ground troops on Monday. ``If a ground component is 
required, it is my recommendation _ and I would almost say insistence 
_ that it be largely, if not wholly European in nature,'' Cohen said. 
Cohen's remarks surprised officials within the administration and 
NATO. NATO's commanders have drafted a plan to send as many as 26,000 
troops to Kosovo to enforce a cease-fire and support humanitarian 
relief for ethnic Albanians driven from their homes by Milosevic's 
crackdown. Administration officials said no decision had been made 
on using American ground forces, but Albright and others have refused 
to rule out the possibility, should Milosevic agree to halt the violence 
in Kosovo. The internal rift underscores the extent to which the administration 
is still scrambling to forge its policies toward Kosovo. Aides to 
President Clinton said on Tuesday that they still hoped to persuade 
Milosevic to accept a diplomatic solution. The administration's envoy 
to the Balkans, Richard Holbrooke, met with Milosevic for a second 
day in Belgradeon Tuesday. Holbrooke pressed Milosevic and leaders 
of Kosovo's ethnic Albanians to accept an interim agreement to give 
Kosovo a limited form of autonomy but puts off a final decision on 
the province's status, according to a draft of the agreement provided 
to The New York Times. It is not clear whether either side would accept 
the agreement, which provides Kosovo less autonomy than in the former 
Yugoslavia before 1989. In an address to the meeting of the World 
Bank and International Monetary Fund on Tuesday, Clinton called on 
Milosevic on Tuesday to accept U.N. demands spelled out in a resolution 
passed by the Security Council last month, including a withdrawal 
of Serb police and military units from Kosovo. ``The stakes are high,'' 
Clinton said. ``The time is now to end the violence in Kosovo.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>