<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0309 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After more than a year on the sidelines, European governments are 
challenging the United States over how to address the world financial 
crisis, suggesting that new ideas and leadership are needed as the 
turmoil persists and Congress continues to block new funding for the 
International Monetary Fund. In ways both subtle and overt, European 
officials have used this week's gathering of finance ministers and 
central bankers here at the IMF and the World Bank to remind the United 
States that they represent an economic power to be reckoned with, 
and one with the authority to be listened to on the world stage. By 
flexing their muscles, Europeans are shedding their traditional deference 
to the United States on global financial policy as they prepare for 
a new era in which most of Europe will be bound into a single economic 
unit by a common currency. Consumed by high unemployment and other 
economic problems at home, and unconvinced initially that the crisis 
that began last year in Asia would have much effect on them, European 
countries stayed largely in the background over the last year as the 
United States worked closely with the IMF to keep the turmoil under 
control. But in the last several weeks and during the meetings here 
in the past few days, they have proposed shifting more power into 
a committee within the IMF, a move that could have restricted the 
ability of the United States to exert its influence directly over 
the fund's management. They have given far more enthusiastic consideration 
than the United States to efforts by the World Bank to shift the focus 
away from austerity programs to poverty-fighting and to challenge 
the orthodoxy that controls on the international flow of capital are 
always a bad idea. With their own economies strengthening after years 
of stagnation, European officials even dared to criticize domestic 
politics and policy in the United States, which for the last five 
years has not been shy about lecturing the rest of the world about 
how to achieve prosperity and stability. At the top of their list 
was the unwillingness of the Republican-controlled Congress to provide 
the full $18 billion in new funding for the IMF requested by President 
Clinton. Dominique Strauss-Kahn, France's finance minister, pointedly 
suggested that those countries who were willing to shore up the IMF's 
financial condition act on their own without waiting for the United 
States. He also suggested that the United States should consider increasing 
government spending or cutting taxes to give a boost to the American 
economy, given the flexibility created by the Federal budget deficit. 
``I cannot really believe that if the slowdown in growth is very important, 
the administration will not use at least part of the surplus to sustain 
growth,'' Strauss-Kahn said. In Asia, where Europe has been seen as 
disengaged and reluctant to commit money or political capital to dealing 
with a crisis that has sent millions of people spiraling into poverty, 
Europe's increased involvement is seen as long overdue. ``At least 
they should realize there's no such thing as an isolated country,'' 
said Sir Donald Tsang, Hong Kong's financial secretary, warning that 
the Europe's economy would inevitably be harmed if the turmoil was 
not contained. American policymakers played down any idea of a rift 
or confrontation with Europe, saying there were many ideas that deserved 
to be considered. But one American official involved in Asia policy 
said the failure of the American-led effort to end the turmoil ``further 
emboldened our European friends'' to mount ``a more concerted challenge 
to the kinds of policy directions we've been offering.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>