<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0472 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A man armed with a pistol and years of anger about his dismissal as 
a part-time city parks employee burst into a meeting room at City 
Hall here Tuesday morning and opened fire, wounding the mayor and 
two members of the City Council, police said. Police said the man, 
a postal worker identified as Joseph Neale Jr., 48, then barricaded 
himself in the room with Mayor Ron Loveridge and several council members 
as police arrived. Minutes later, as police began breaking open the 
locked door with a crowbar and a sledgehammer, Neale opened fire through 
the door, police said. Officers then stormed into the room, just off 
of the council chambers. Shortly after 8 a.m. Tuesday, three officers 
were wounded in the hail of gunfire as the officials took cover. One 
officer, Sgt. Wally Rice, a 20-year police department veteran, was 
hit in the abdomen. Another officer was hit in the hand and a third 
was struck by a round that slammed into the front of his bulletproof 
vest, leaving him bruised but otherwise unhurt. City Council member 
Chuck Beaty, 63, was shot in the face and the shoulder; he was listed 
in critical but stable condition. Loveridge was grazed by a bullet. 
Councilwoman Laura Pearson was hospitalized with a hip wound; Councilwoman 
Terri Thompson was not wounded but was treated for unspecified pain. 
None of the injuries were considered life threatening, the authorities 
said. Neale was hit at least twice by police gunfire and fell to the 
floor. He was taken to a local hospital. Neale had been dismissed 
by the city in 1994 from his job at a local community center, where 
he had established and coached a chess team. Since then he has been 
fighting to get his position back. He recruited team members from 
the struggling neighborhoods of the city's East Side. He said he saw 
chess as a way to develop young minds and keep youths off the streets 
and away from violence. Neale, who is black, sued the city in 1995 
for wrongful termination, citing age and race discrimination. The 
city denied the charges and a judge dismissed them. Neale also said 
that the city had tried to deprive him of his right of free speech. 
That part of his case is scheduled to go to trial on Oct. 19. It is 
unclear why Neale was fired, but during his several years at the center, 
he was a prolific letter writer, asking local merchants for donations 
to the chess team, The Press-Enterprise of Riverside reported in an 
extra edition Tuesday afternoon. Neale also sent copies of a 54-page 
letter he wrote to local, state and federal officials, including President 
Clinton, bemoaning what he said was the lack of educational and employment 
opportunities for black and Hispanic teen-agers. In his suit, Neale 
contended that he had been fired because of that letter. In recent 
weeks, Neale had frequently been seen sitting quietly in the back 
of the City Council chamber during council meetings, The Press-Enterprise 
said. The mayor, several City Council members, the city manager and 
the city attorney were in the room Tuesday morning, preparing for 
the day's regularly scheduled council meeting, when Neale burst in 
and began shooting, said police. ``It was surrealistic, something 
you would see in a movie,'' a shaken Loveridge said shortly after 
being treated for the graze wound to his shoulder. ``You realize you 
may not leave that room, that may be your final testimonial, lying 
on the floor of that room behind council chambers.'' Had the police 
not gone into the room when they did, ``there very possibly would 
have been some deaths,'' said Police Lt. Pete Esquivel. ``There was 
blood all over the place.'' There are no metal detectors in the building. 
``Prior to this,'' said Det. Steve Johnson, ``we never felt metal 
detectors were necessary.'' The month before Neale was fired from 
the youth center, he received a letter from Loveridge. ``I am impressed 
with your personal effort to help the youth of this community,'' the 
mayor wrote. ``You must have invested hundreds of hours working with 
these young people and, it is obvious you have reached many of them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>