<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0450 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The administration on Tuesday intensified its threat to use force 
against the Yugoslav military and the police, as Washington continued 
diplomatic efforts to persuade President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia 
to end the crackdown in Kosovo. And in a move to maintain NATO unity 
behind military action, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright wrote 
to the group's 15 other members over the weekend to urge them to give 
NATO's commanders the authority to use force against the Serbs in 
Yugoslavia. Some allies resist that step; a vote on approving force, 
which was to take place in Brussels on Wednesday, has been delayed 
to the end of the week at the earliest. Some Europeans insist that 
NATO make another effort to persuade Russia to accept the possibility 
of intervention in Yugoslavia. Russia on Tuesday vowed to veto any 
attempt by the United Nations Security Council to authorize the strikes, 
warning of ``serious international consequences'' if NATO used force 
without such authority. The United States has said NATO does not need 
explicit authorization to use force. But some allies say the allies 
need an explicit Security Council resolution. That leaves the United 
States in a position of having to persuade the allies to go along 
even if there is no supporting vote by the Security Council, or persuading 
Russia not to veto such a resolution. Even within the administration 
there is disagreement about how best to pursue and enforce a resolution 
to the standoff with Milosevic over the Serbian crackdown against 
the ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. The rift emerged over the possible 
use of American ground forces to follow up a diplomatic solution or 
military action in Kosovo. Secretary of Defense William Cohen told 
the Senate Armed Services Committee that he opposed placing American 
troops on the ground in Kosovo, a province in southern Serbia, though 
he said some sort of international force might be necessary to insure 
stability. That puts him at odds with Albright and other members of 
the administration, who have not ruled out the use of ground troops. 
``If a ground component is required, it is my recommendation _ and 
I would almost say insistence _ that it be largely if not wholly European 
in nature,'' Cohen said. Members of Congress worry about another peacekeeping 
mission in the Balkans because American troops now in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
do not seem to be near a pullout yet. Cohen's remarks surprised officials 
within the administration and NATO. Allied commanders have drafted 
a plan to send up to 26,000 troops to Kosovo to enforce a cease-fire 
and support relief efforts for Albanians driven from their homes by 
Serbs. Serbia and Montenegro are the two republics remaining in Yugoslavia, 
and Serbs are by far the dominant force. Administration officials 
said no decision had been made on using American ground forces should 
Milosevic halt the violence. The internal rift underscores the extent 
to which the administration is still forging its policy toward Kosovo. 
Aides to President Clinton said they still hoped to persuade Milosevic 
to accept a diplomatic solution. The administration's envoy to the 
Balkans, Richard Holbrooke, met with Milosevic again on Tuesday in 
Belgrade, the capital. The envoy pressed Milosevic and leaders of 
Kosovo's ethnic Albanians to accept an interim agreement that would 
give Kosovo limited autonomy but would delay a final decision on the 
province's status, according to a draft of the agreement provided 
to The New York Times. It is not clear whether either side would accept 
the agreement, which would provide Kosovo less autonomy than it had 
in 1989, before the breakup of Yugoslavia. In an address on Tuesdayy 
to a meeting of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, 
President Clinton called on Milosevic to accept U.N. demands in a 
resolution passed by the Security Council last month, including a 
withdrawal of Serbian police and military units from Kosovo. ``The 
stakes are high,'' Clinton said. ``The time is now to end the violence 
in Kosovo.'' Cohen's remarks appeared to be an attempt to reassure 
a wary Congress that the United States is not about to embark on a 
large-scale peacekeeping operation like the one in Bosnia. The concern 
was not partisan. Sen. Max Cleland, D-Ga., told Cohen and the chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs, Gen. Henry Shelton, he was not sure that the 
administration's threats of force would work in Kosovo. ``I have grave 
concerns about our ability to manage that civil war through military 
force, through military intervention,'' he said. ``I think and fear 
that it might be actually counterproductive.'' NATO's military commanders 
have completed plans for an expanding series of missile and air strikes 
against targets in Kosovo and, if needed, throughout Serbia. These 
would hit military and police sites and equipment but would not seek 
to destroy civilian structures like bridges or communication networks, 
officials said. Cohen said of Milosevic that the strikes would inflict 
``enough damage to reduce his capacity to wage war against the people 
he's been killing.'' NATO has also drafted plans for military operations 
that would stop short of actual attacks, including enforcement of 
a ``no flight'' zone that would prevent the Yugoslav air force from 
operating over Kosovo, a NATO official said on Tuesday night. The 
Pentagon still has not disclosed the forces that the United States 
is prepared to contribute to any strikes. Pentagon and NATO officials 
said that if strikes are approved, the alliance can strike within 
hours or days with what one senior official called ``a potent force'' 
of several hundred warplanes. In her letter to the allies, Albright 
said it was important for NATO to take the next step and give its 
supreme commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, the authority to strike, a senior 
administration official said. That would not mean strikes are necessarily 
imminent, but it would increase pressure on Milosevic. Under the latest 
draft of the proposal that Holbrooke presented to Milosevic and the 
Albanians, Kosovo would remain within Serbia and have relative autonomy 
over internal affairs, but would be subject to possibly debilitating 
vetoes by the minority Serbs in a local parliament. Roughly 90 percent 
of the people of Kosovo are ethnic Albanians. Yugoslavia would retain 
responsibility for customs, military affairs, foreign affairs and 
monetary policy, while Kosovo will govern itself domestically through 
legislative, executive and judicial branches. Senior American officials 
said the proposal would delay a decision on Kosovo's independence 
_ which the West opposes _ for three years. But to win Milosevic's 
approval, allied officials said, the draft language on sovereignty 
is weak. After three years, according to the draft, ``the two sides 
will undertake a comprehensive assessment of the agreement, with the 
aim of improving its implementation and considering proposals by either 
side for additional steps, which will require mutual agreement for 
adoption.'' The word ``sovereignty'' is not even mentioned, and there 
is thought to be little possibility that Belgrade would provide the 
``mutual agreement'' required for that kind of ``additional step.'' 
Bujar Bukoshi, the prime minister of a group that calls itself the 
Kosovo government in exile, said in an interview on Tuesday that Washington 
must be careful ``not to press the victim instead of the aggressor.'' 
``This is far less than the autonomy we enjoyed until 1989'' when 
Milosevic, then president of Serbia, changed Kosovo's status, Bukoshi 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>