<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
ARIZONA: 2 Quarterbacks, 0 Losses Alternating quarterbacks can be 
a two-headed curse for many teams, but the Wildcats are making it 
a blessing. Keith Smith and Ortege Jenkins have led Arizona to a 5-0 
record and No. 10 ranking (No. 25 in The New York Times computer) 
heading into its Pac-10 confrontation at home against No. 3 UCLA (3-0, 
1-0) on Saturday. ``It's working out better than I thought,'' Smith 
said. ``We're tight as friends, so it's not like I'm rooting against 
him. I'm totally rooting for him. We're like one big quarterback instead 
of two little ones.'' Statistically, Smith has the edge. He has completed 
51 of 74 passes for 782 yards and 6 touchdowns. His efficiency rating 
is 179.04, which would make him second in the nation if he had one 
more attempt. Jenkins is 33 of 61 for 481 yards and 3 touchdowns, 
and has the greater flair for the spectacular. His flip over three 
defenders into the end zone with 4 seconds left gave the Wildcats 
a 31-28 upset of Washington last week. ``How could that not be the 
highlight of the year?'' an admiring Smith said. They are truly equals 
in the system. Jenkins played eight series against Washington and 
Smith seven. Arizona even has a trick play in which they are both 
deployed on offense, and it was used to great effect last week. Smith 
stationed himself at tailback and Jenkins lined up at quarterback 
and went in motion as a receiver would, leaving the spot behind the 
center vacant. After the ball was snapped on the ground, Smith picked 
it up and fired the ball to Jenkins near the sideline for a 22-yard 
gain that kept an 80-yard touchdown drive alive. Both return next 
year, and Smith fully expects the platooning to continue. ``We know 
that each other is not going to blow each other out,'' he said. GEORGIA: 
A Lesson From Baseball If Quincy Carter, the Bulldogs' quarterback, 
seems mature for a freshman, credit the daily grind of baseball. Carter 
has played outfield in the Chicago Cubs organization the last two 
years, and said the games in which he struggled taught him resilience. 
``You're not going to do your best every day,'' said the 20-year-old 
Carter, who has approached phenom status by guiding the No. 7 Bulldogs 
(No. 9 Times computer) to a 4-0 record heading into Saturday's Southeastern 
Conference showdown with No. 4 Tennessee (4-0, No. 7 Times computer). 
Carter, from Southwest DeKalb High School, reneged on a letter of 
intent to Georgia Tech when the Cubs drafted him in the second round 
in June 1996. Missing football, he enrolled at Georgia last spring 
and beat out three upperclassmen in August for the starting job. Despite 
not playing quarterback for nearly three years, he has completed 66 
of 93 passes for 957 yards and 6 touchdowns with 1 interception, giving 
him a better passing efficiency than Kentucky's Heisman candidate, 
Tim Couch. Carter threw for 318 yards and 2 touchdowns in last week's 
28-27 upset of LSU. The 6-foot-2, 220-pound Carter is also the third 
leading rusher on the team with 111 yards and 2 touchdowns on 37 carries. 
Carter, who hit .248 in 27 games for Class A Rockford last summer, 
said he will continue to play both sports. He already has sought the 
advice of the current Cowboy and former baseball player Deion Sanders. 
``He told me never just give up on one of them if you love them both,'' 
Carter said. SYRACUSE: Changing the Focus Coach Paul Pasqualoni is 
calling on his Orangemen (2-2, 1-0 Big East) to shake off last week's 
38-17 defeat to North Carolina State in order to refocus on winning 
the conference championship. ``We can't allow it to be that disappointing,'' 
Pasqualoni said. ``Hey, we're all grown-ups here.'' The Orangemen, 
ranked 24th in both the coaches' and media poll and unranked by The 
New York Times computer, entertain Cincinnati, a nonconference foe, 
on Saturday. RUTGERS: A Successful Conversion One of the advantages 
of struggling in the standings is that Rutgers can develop its freshman 
recruits. Tosh Riddick, of Allentown, Pa., was converted from running 
back to receiver to shore up Rutgers' injury-depleted pass-catching 
corps. In his first exposure Sept. 19, Riddick caught a 25-yard pass 
against Syracuse. Last week against Miami, Riddick had a breakout 
game, grabbing 3 passes for 102 yards, including a 58-yard touchdown 
reception. ``We will continue to develop him as a wide receiver,'' 
coach Terry Shea said. ``He truly has that breakaway speed.'' Rutgers 
(2-3, 0-3 Big East) has an off week, then travels to Pittsburgh on 
Oct. 17. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>