<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0465 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After years of policy debates, hand-wringing and foiled attempts, 
the managed care revolution is finally coming to the city's 1.2 million 
Medicaid recipients. And the details indicate just how hard the transition 
will be. Information brochures featuring a woman with her child and 
dog will be remade for Muslim residents of Brooklyn _ without the 
dog and with more modest dress. Doctors fluent in Tagalog will have 
to be found. People with no telephones will have to be tracked down 
with a detective's diligence and be made to understand that, perhaps 
for the first time in their lives, they need to choose a doctor. Nearly 
every state in the union has required at least some of its Medicaid 
recipients to enroll in managed care plans; in several counties in 
upstate New York, mandatory managed care has already begun. But New 
York City's plan _ whose first phase is expected to be up and running 
by the end of the year, pending federal approval _ is not just the 
nation's largest. It is also likely to be the toughest to put into 
effect because of the city's vastly multilingual population, the depth 
of its social problems and relative inexperience with managed care 
among even its most affluent residents. The stakes are enormous _ 
19 percent of New York City's nonelderly population is on Medicaid. 
Both the city and the state, which each pick up a quarter of the cost 
of Medicaid, have made their move into managed care a crucial goal, 
asserting that it will ease the historically huge fiscal burden while 
providing better care for the poor. ``From a public health perspective, 
we're very hopeful that managed care will create an opportunity to 
provide more preventative health to correct the fragmented fee-for-service 
programs for the poor,'' said city Health Commissioner Neil Cohen. 
``We think there are many gains.'' But many health care policy experts, 
some government officials and advocates for the poor seriously doubt 
New York's readiness. ``I believe they are not there yet,'' said Susan 
Dooha, a policy analyst at the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the AIDS service 
organization. ``The moving trucks are outside the house, and the people 
are painting the walls, but I am not confident that the medical home 
is ready.'' The components of the rollout range from the mundane to 
the profound, and each has provoked concern. Most advocates for the 
poor say, based on the experiences of the 365,000 residents who have 
voluntarily enrolled in limited areas of the city, that there has 
been far too little thought put into how beneficiaries, many of them 
illiterate, non-English speaking, transient or without phones, will 
be informed of this sea change. In addition, recent surveys have found 
that many doctors' offices and health maintenance organizations, which 
have grown by leaps and bounds in recent years, lack the proper technical 
systems to monitor care. There is also an important economic concern: 
whether New York state will be able to save money and still entice 
the commercial HMOs, which have been dropping out of Medicaid across 
the country. So far, only five of the participating HMOs in the city's 
mandatory program are commercial companies _ Oxford, HIP, Empire, 
Wellcare and United Health Care. The rest are what are called provider-sponsored 
health plans, run by the hospitals, clinics and the like that have 
traditionally served the poor or HMOs that were set up for low-income 
patients exclusively. The fleeing of commercial HMOs raises two larger 
problems: While there appear to be enough doctors to handle the first 
stage of the rollout, many people fear that further on there will 
be too few primary care physicians and specialists to give high-quality 
care. This is especially worrisome, they say, in poor neighborhoods, 
which have traditionally been underserved by doctors and where patients 
tend to be far sicker than the general population. Further, if most 
of the Medicaid HMOs are run by the same hospitals and clinics that 
have been serving Medicaid recipients for years, will mandatory managed 
care be able to fulfill its promise of better care, with a wider universe 
of choices, at lower cost? Put another way, will the city essentially 
end up with separate but unequal managed care systems, one for the 
poor and one for the middle class? The most vexing problem is also 
the hardest to quantify. People on Medicaid, who have long sought 
out health care only after they get sick, at low-income clinics and 
hospital emergency rooms, will now have to wrap their minds around 
a totally different system of care. And dealing with a referral system 
that has often confused and frustrated a relatively stable and well-educated 
middle class will be at least as tough for those on Medicaid. ``I 
don't think they're ready,'' said Michael Sparer, an assistant professor 
at the Columbia University School of Public Health, who has done several 
studies of Medicaid managed care around the country. What he found 
is that states that gave the least thought to the enrollment process 
fared the worst. While no state is quite comparable to New York in 
size, they have lessons to offer. Tennessee, for example, did not 
give proper forethought to its enrollment process and was totally 
unprepared to see enrollment grow from 35,000 people to 275,000 literally 
overnight. Minnesota prohibits direct marketing by health care plans 
but had an extensive outreach and education component to its program, 
which helped beneficiaries understand what they were getting into. 
California had a large immigrant population, like New York, and failed 
to staff its program sufficiently in the beginning, which caused problems. 
The state used enrollment by mail with limited outreach and education, 
which resulted in confusion. The program also suffered from a lack 
of commercial HMO participation. California is still ironing out its 
kinks but has one advantage over New York: its long history with managed 
care. New York City and state officials acknowledge these concerns 
and insist that they have learned from their botched attempt to move 
Medicaid recipients voluntarily into managed care earlier in the decade. 
``We have exercised a great deal of caution and diligence,'' said 
Robert Hinkley, a spokesman for the state Health Department. This 
time, the city will move slowly, starting with lower Manhattan, parts 
of Brooklyn and Staten Island, and will branch out in stages around 
the five boroughs. Each phase will take 13 months, with starting dates 
staggered at five-month intervals. Few people say that the old system 
_ traditional fee-for-service medicine _ was ideal. Many doctors would 
not see Medicaid patients because they found payments too low, and 
so most Medicaid patients sought care in grim clinics or emergency 
rooms. Last year, New York City spent $2.8 billion on Medicaid. Under 
managed care, Medicaid patients will go to the doctors in their plan, 
rather than seeking out any doctor who accepts Medicaid. Instead of 
being reimbursed per visit, providers will get monthly rates, known 
as capitation, for each patient. Outside of the cost savings to the 
state, managed care, in theory, will benefit everyone. Emergency rooms 
would no longer be overburdened with nonurgent visits. Patients with 
chronic conditions like asthma would be seen regularly, cutting down 
on their acute care and decreasing hospital stays. And Medicaid patients 
would sit side by side with lawyers and professors, getting care from 
the same providers serving large HMOs. But can New York pull it off? 
The Health Care Finance Administration, the federal agency that granted 
the state the right to switch to mandatory Medicaid managed care, 
will ultimately have the final vote on the city's readiness, when 
it studies and reports on it this month. The federal government's 
approval of the move to mandatory managed care did not come easily. 
Earlier in the decade, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani began to push for Medicaid 
recipients to move voluntarily into managed care programs. The effort 
was quickly stymied by fraudulent practices by managed care companies 
that caused the city to nearly shut down its effort to market their 
plans. Since then, the environment for managed care has altered greatly. 
At that time, managed care companies were fighting one another for 
Medicaid business. But New York ended up being far less generous than 
they had anticipated, and the potential for profit was cut even more 
when the state introduced a competitive bidding process that resulted 
in rate cuts of 10 to 30 percent, depending on the plan. As a result 
of clamoring among HMO companies, there have since been slight rate 
increases, but rates are still far below what most plans are looking 
for. ``We strongly believe the success of any Medicaid managed care 
program relies on a rate structure that supports the services,'' said 
Leslie Moran, a spokeswoman for the HMO Trade Conference in Albany. 
Ms. Moran said capitation averaged $102 a person, compared with the 
average of $142 a person in fees for service, causing many health 
maintenance organizations upstate to drop out. ``If you are a doctor 
already serving 1,200 patients, how many more can you sign up?'' said 
Ms. Dooha of Gay Men's Health Crisis. ``Also, you're talking about 
a very sick population, so do we have a sufficient distribution and 
array of specialists? And who will suffer? Will people be getting 
a five-minute physical? Or will the uninsured no longer get attention? 
What falls out is of concern to all.'' It seems now that for the earliest 
stages, the supply of primary care doctors will not be a huge problem. 
``The bottom line is that capacity is not as bad as we expected going 
into it,'' said John Billings, director of the Health Research Program 
at the Robert F. Wagner School for Public Service at New York University, 
whose capacity study is considered the gold standard in the industry. 
But while the state defines sufficient capacity as one doctor to 1,500 
patients, many advocates for the poor and health care experts feel 
that is too low. Capacity is also defined by how available doctors 
are, another problem cited by experts. There is also a fear among 
most health care experts that once the plan starts moving into areas 
like the South Bronx and remote parts of Queens, there will be fewer 
doctors and clinics that serve Medicaid patients. In a 1996 study 
of New York City's health care centers for the poor, the United Hospital 
Fund, a nonprofit research organization, found that only half of those 
surveyed had doctors available after hours and on weekends. This is 
important because discouraging Medicaid recipients from using emergency 
rooms for ordinary care is one of the program's main goals. What is 
more, only about half regularly called patients who missed appointments, 
or reminded them to show up. These numbers improved only slightly 
in a follow-up study in 1997. But perhaps most daunting is the enrollment 
process itself. Medicaid recipients will soon be sent packages informing 
them that they need to pick a plan, and detailing how to apply for 
an exemption. People with HIV and severe mental illness need not join 
managed care programs if they do not wish to do so. Maximus Inc., 
a broker hired by the state to take over the enrollment process, has 
not yet made these packages public. But the potential problems are 
clear enough. Will recipients open a package that comes in the mail, 
especially if they cannot read it? What if they change apartments 
frequently, which is common, and never get the package? Other issues 
include the fact that the original letters to recipients do not clearly 
state who is exempt, and there is concern about whether people will 
get sufficient guidance through the enrollment process. ``The city 
and state have done no outreach,'' said Christine Molnar, director 
of the Medicaid managed care education project for the Community Service 
Society of New York, an advocacy group that is working with beneficiaries 
in Brooklyn to help the enrollment process. ``There is no basic education 
on managed care, how it works, what is mandatory, what isn't. ``The 
most common thing we hear is that someone goes to the clinic and presents 
their card and learns they can't go,'' Ms. Molnar said. ``We hear 
a lot of people who can't get a referral or go to a specialist they 
traditionally went to and get stuck with a bill or get rejected or 
get referred to someone out of network.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>