<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A House committee investigating campaign finance abuses has concluded 
in a report that the Democratic Party should have returned up to $1.7 
million more in potentially tainted contributions than the $3.2 million 
the party gave back after President Clinton's re-election. The report, 
written by the Republican majority on the House government Reform 
and Oversight Committee, said that investigators had found hundreds 
of thousands of dollars in questionable donations beyond the contributions 
returned by the Democrats, all of which had come from well-known figures 
in the inquiry like James Riady, head of the wealthy Indonesian banking 
empire, and John Huang, the fund-raiser with close ties to the Riady 
family. The committee concluded that the potentially illegal contributions 
were made between 1992 and 1996 in the form of donations funneled 
to a variety of entities like the Democratic National Committee, Democratic 
state parties or other party fund-raising committees. ``Time and time 
again the DNC received information regarding the illegality or inappropriateness 
of contributions but failed to take the appropriate action of returning 
or disgorging them,'' the report said. In addition, the report found 
that when the Democratic National Committee was unable to fully investigate 
a questionable contribution, officials often chose to keep the money. 
A spokesman for the Democratic committee, Rick Hess, said that the 
report's claims were wildly exaggerated and that the timing of the 
release of the report was intended to damage Democrats in the November 
elections. ``The Republican's claims are simply illegitimate,'' Hess 
said. ``The DNC has returned every donation deemed illegal or inappropriate.'' 
The report, which is to be made public later this week, began circulating 
Monday evening on Capitol Hill as the committee distributed the document 
to lawmakers on the panel. It reflects months of work by a Republican-led 
committee frequently shattered by partisan fights. The report, which 
has been expected for weeks, is being made public as members of Congress 
weigh whether to expand the impeachment inquiry approved on Monday 
by the House Judiciary Committee beyond the issues stemming from President 
Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky. But the report does not 
accuse Clinton of engaging in wrongdoing or of knowing of any specific 
crime nor does it accuse him of committing an impeachable offense. 
Nevertheless, congressional aides said Rep. Dan Burton, R-Ind., the 
committee chairman, would send the report to the Justice Department 
and the Federal Election Commission. The committee concluded that 
$600,000 beyond the amount returned by the Democrats was clearly improper 
and another $1.1 million highly suspect, based on the investigators' 
analyses of bank records, wire transfer reports and statements by 
witnesses who appeared before the committee. Burton has repeatedly 
attacked Clinton. It was Burton who led the committee's vote to cite 
Attorney General Janet Reno with contempt for her refusal to turn 
over reports from FBI Director Louis Freeh and Charles La Bella, the 
former head of the Justice Department's campaign finance investigative 
team, urging her to seek the appointment of an independent prosecutor 
to look into how the Democrats financed Clinton's re-election. The 
Burton committee report complained that it was unable to fully examine 
the facts because nearly 120 witnesses refused to cooperate or fled 
the country. The committee faulted the White House for delaying the 
campaign finance inquiry and it criticized foreign governments for 
what the panel called a ``a total lack of cooperation.'' Hess, the 
spokesman of the Democratic National Committee, complained that the 
Republican majority on the panel had produced a tract intended to 
damage the Democrats in the midterm elections. ``Congress is going 
to adjourn this weekend so he's got to get this out there,'' Hess 
said. But Kevin Binger, chief of staff of the Burton committee, dismissed 
the accusation that the report, an interim document that could be 
augmented later, was timed for its political impact. ``We would have 
published this report a long time ago if we had had more cooperation 
from the DNC and the White House,'' Binger said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>