<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0217 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Alice Walker's best-known novel, ``The Color Purple,'' for which she 
won the Pulitzer Prize and the American Book Award in 1983, placed 
her in the literary pantheon, as a writer who spoke in searingly dramatic 
terms of the struggle of black women against both racism and the violence 
of patriarchal society. Ms. Walker has continued, with less noteworthy 
results, to spin variations on this theme. Her latest offering, ``By 
the Light of My Father's Smile,'' is a strong indication that, if 
she hasn't exhausted the subject, she is exhausting her readers with 
what has by now become a mannered and tendentious litany of New Age 
cliches. Ms. Walker's new novel recounts the interwoven experiences 
of several women, though the underlying message of the book, hammered 
home in frequent passages of sophomoric didacticism, is that most 
men are not very admirable, that sex is spiritual and that primitive 
civilizations are morally and sensually superior to technologically 
advanced ones. Ms. Walker never loses an opportunity to make these 
points, though mostly she does so by putting opinions into the mouths 
of half-formed characters rather than developing ideas through the 
action of the story itself. ``We believe only in the unavoidable horror 
of hurting others and of likewise being hurt,'' intones a member of 
a Mexican tribe of Indians, demonstrating the point about moral superiority. 
``Being sorry and not being sorry. Forgiving or not forgiving. Our 
Story is one that continues only for as long as it takes us to do 
these things.'' The person speaking, Manuelito, goes on to describe 
the source of Western colonialist violence against the indigenous 
peoples as a harshly puritanical repudiation of the Indians' ritualistic 
celebration of their children's sexuality. ``They did not appreciate 
the idea of a mother and father touching the breasts and kissing the 
vulva and phallus of their grown children, even to bless them,'' Manuelito 
explains of the Christian missionaries who came to his tribe. ``Because 
we practiced this, they raided our villages, hacked off our heads 
with machetes, enslaved us to work in the gold and silver mines. Burned 
our children alive.'' Anthropologists will be surprised to learn that 
Indian mothers and fathers kissed the sexual organs of their newly 
married children and that the practice prompted Cortez's genocidal 
attack on the Aztecs. But a kind of rapturously wrongheaded rewriting 
of scholarly visions is not the only fault in Ms. Walker's new book. 
Other problems include characters whose shared chief feature is bland 
self-satisfaction and the almost complete absence of narrative drive 
or, indeed, of dramatic structure. Ms. Walker seems to have substituted 
the heartfelt concerns that motivated ``The Color Purple'' for a mediocre 
sort of spiritualist philosophizing that is both cloying and predictable. 
Ms. Walker's main characters are two sisters, Susannah and Magdalena 
Robinson. Susannah is a striking middle-class woman whose first appearance 
is described by her father, speaking to us (as does Manuelito) after 
his death. Robinson Sr., observing Susannah from the afterlife, describes 
her in the midst of a vigorous erotic encounter with her lover of 
the moment, Pauline, a gray-haired 55-year-old who, during the course 
of the book, extols the virtues of marijuana, of having contempt for 
men and of sensualist liberation. Another of the main characters is 
Irene, an ostracized dwarf whom Susannah meets while on a visit to 
a Greek island and who later in the novel turns out to have a lot 
of the same ideas as Pauline. The story told in ``By the Light of 
My Father's Smile'' is one of discord and reconciliation among the 
members of the Robinson family. Susannah and Magdelena grew up in 
a remote village in Mexico where their anthropologist parents went 
to study the Mundo tribe, a half-black, half-Indian group that escaped 
North American slavery centuries ago. Lacking research grants, the 
Robinsons pretend that they are Christian missionaries so that they 
can be sent to the land of the Mundo. Their presence among their subjects, 
in other words, takes place under false pretenses, which, unbeknownst 
to them, the Indians have understood all along. The seminal moment 
in this family story comes when the girls' father, concerned that 
14-year-old Magdalena's romance with the young Manuelito is making 
a bad impression, beats her with his belt. That act turns all the 
other members of the family against him. Magdalena, known as Mad Dog 
by the Indians, becomes sullen and obese. Susannah, forced to take 
sides, blames her father for estranging her from Magdalena. The girls' 
mother, Langley, sleeps in another room, though the father wins her 
back. ``There was no warmth without her, no fire,'' the father recalls. 
``No rebellion of my own angel to enjoy. No surprise.'' The Robinson 
family story is told by several narrators _ the father, Susannah, 
Magdelena and Langley, as well as Pauline and Manuelito, all of them 
echoing the well-worn themes of Ms. Walker's victim politics. ``So 
much beauty in a world indifferent to their ways, a green and gentle 
and supple world that was actually repelled by the mountainous thickness 
of the pale male body,'' says Susannah of one people she visits as 
a tourist. That is actually one of the more stylistically compelling 
of the pronouncements in a book replete with sappier ones. ``Anyone 
can see that woman is the mother/of the oldest man on earth/ is it 
not then a prayer/to bow before her?'' goes a Mundo poem taught by 
Manuelito to Robinson Sr. after the two of them have met up in the 
afterlife. ``Did you ever wonder why we bothered with you, Senor?'' 
Manuelito asks the former missionary. ``It is because you were always 
making love to your wife,'' he replies to his own question. Even at 
the story's most intense moment, when Magdalena, in a jealous rage, 
attacks and almost kills her sister, Ms. Walker fails to create a 
sense of emotional urgency, letting the episode slip quickly into 
the narrational and intellectual limpness that infuses this whole 
book. PUBLICATION NOTES: `BY THE LIGHT OF MY FATHER'S SMILE' By Alice 
Walker 225 pages. Random House $22.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>