<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0398 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Almost 40 years ago, when I was a young journalist working at NBC 
News, I bought a woodcut of a church from print dealer Sylvan Cole. 
It showed a church tower, viewed as through a disturbing prism. I 
recognized it as the work of Lyonel Feininger, for whose art I had 
developed a no doubt superficial appreciation while at college. The 
fact that it was an artist's proof and that Feininger had inscribed 
it in pencil to his wife gave it added appeal. For more than three 
decades now, I have looked at it every day, except when I was traveling. 
It has hung on the wall of my studies on four continents, and I find 
new things in it, new insights into the distortions of the modern 
world, at least once a year. I long ago learned that it depicted a 
church at Gelmeroda, and that Feininger almost obsessively drew, painted 
and made prints of the church for many years. But I never knew where 
Gelmeroda was. Then one day five years ago, my wife and I turned off 
a potholed autobahn in southeastern Germany and headed into Weimar. 
A minute or so later, I saw the sign _ small, simple, just the name 
``Gelmeroda'' in black block letters. Could it be? I looked up, and 
just to the left, over there above the trees, was my spire. I was 
as excited as if I had stumbled into Brigadoon. A little more than 
two hours south of Berlin, the church still stands at the center of 
its higgledy-piggledy village. When I made my discovery, the old East 
Germany was just dying. There were no road markers, no plaques, no 
tourists. But times have changed. Now there are signposts on the autoroute, 
brochures in the church itself and concerts in the nave in the summer. 
We went to one, given by young musicians from Heidelberg, one night 
last July. Reunification has reshuffled the artistic deck in Berlin, 
too. The scaffolding surrounding the great Pergamon Altar, a masterpiece 
of Hellenistic art from the 2nd century B.C., has come down. One of 
the main attractions on the Museum Island, where other museums are 
also under repair, it reopened to the public in August, cleaned and 
restored, though work remains to be done. The big event of the summer 
was the opening in June of the new Gemaldegalerie, or picture gallery, 
where the Prussian state collection of Old Masters _ divided by the 
Cold War, like Berlin, between East and West _ has been reassembled. 
The new building is inoffensive from the outside, though it faces 
a windswept plaza with all the charm of an airport concourse; inside, 
a vast, beige central hall, filled mainly with columns, is more banal 
than restful. Those are quibbles, though. The gallery, part of the 
Kulturforum, neatly fills a gap between other museums, and when the 
immense, multibillion-dollar construction project at nearby Potsdamer 
Platz is completed in 2000, and the spindly little trees have put 
on some heft, this area at the center of the new Berlin will regain 
the focus and animation it had before allied bombers and artillery 
devastated the city and the Wall knifed through the neighborhood. 
No museum has better Germanic pictures: Cranach, Holbein, Memling 
and Duerer, including his almost supernaturally luminous ``Virgin 
and Child With the Finch.'' Van Eyck, Petrus Christus, van der Weyden 
and other Netherlandish masters are abundantly represented. First-rate 
Raphaels, Titians and Carpaccios as well, to say nothing of the ``Man 
With the Golden Helmet,'' as popular now that the savants say it's 
not by Rembrandt as when they said it was. And less than a block away, 
in Mies van de Rohe's New National Gallery, my man Feininger was having 
his days in the sun as well. Feininger was forever betwixt and between. 
Born in New York in 1871, the son of prominent classical musicians, 
he spent 50 years in Germany, returning to the United States, an awkward 
stranger in his native land, when the Nazis came to power. They posed 
a threat to Feininger's art, which they classified as ``degenerate,'' 
and to his wife, Julia, who was Jewish. Affiliated with the Bauhaus 
throughout its troubled existence in Weimar, Dessau and Berlin, he 
at the same time admired and sometimes emulated two great romantic 
painters, the Englishman J.M.W. Turner and the German Caspar David 
Friedrich. He was a contemporary and friend of the artists of the 
Blaue Reiter and the Bruecke, especially Karl Schmidt-Rottluff, though 
like Max Beckmann he held himself aloof from the mainstream of German 
Expressionism. The retrospective in Berlin, which ran through Oct. 
11, opens Nov. 1 in the Haus der Kunst in Munich, where is will remain 
until Jan. 24, shows Feininger encountering and digesting these influences 
and many more. More than 130 works, including most of the artist's 
major canvasses from European and American museums, have been brought 
together in a show that displays Feininger's characteristic crystalline 
forms to remarkable effect. This is reality disassembled and reconstructed, 
as in the Cubist pictures by Braque and Picasso that Feininger saw 
at the Salon des Independants in 1911. But in his hand, Cubism became 
something very different. Colors are more vivid, forms are more angular, 
and the subjects of the paintings _ a church or a bird, a bridge or 
a ship _ retain their basic outlines more clearly. As his main motifs, 
Feininger chose large, public, architectonic objects, unlike the small, 
domestic, painterly objects _ guitars and pipes and water carafes 
_ favored by the Cubists. That was the Bauhaus influence at work, 
as was his vibrant pallette, which reflected his close relationship 
with the skilled colorist Johannes Itten, another pioneering Bauhaus 
instructor. It was while working in Weimar before World War I that 
Feininger first spotted the little church in Gelmeroda. He wrote at 
the time: ``There are church towers in God-forsaken places that are 
among the most mystical things I know of.'' He was impressed by the 
surreal character of the old building, and especially the wooden tower, 
as sharp as a fencer's epee, with a clock face on one of its sides. 
In some early Gelmeroda paintings, the church looks like a giant wearing 
a helmet, with the clock face a single eye, gleaming green-blue. Later, 
the rustic Gothic building takes on a modern form, as glisteningly 
transparent as the Crystal Cathedral in Orange County, Calif., as 
structurally pure as Mies at his best. Idealizing the primitive, Paradox 
cloaks it in machine-age garb. There are seven Gelmerodas in the show, 
including three especially luminous images from American museums, 
one each from the Metropolitan and the Guggenheim in New York and 
the Rhode Island School of Design in Providence. Taking up painting 
``as a jolly old gent of 36,'' as he himself put it, after a successful 
career as a cartoonist, Feininger brought to his new trade a gift 
for suggesting motion. ``The White Man'' (1907) is an absurdly tall 
figure, hands in pockets, shoulders slouched, loping like a stilt-walker 
through Paris. ``The Bicycle Race'' (1912) seems about to burst out 
of its frame down the road, with the hunched bodies of four riders 
depicted as geometric, Futurist blocks of color above black slashes 
suggesting the bikes' frames. ``The Bird Cloud'' (1926) has all the 
thrust of a Concorde lifting off the runway. Enthralled by things 
mechanical _ he rode a bicycle himself, imagined space vehicles and 
studied locomotives _ Feininger turned them into part of a fantasy 
world. Many of the earlier pictures, and a few towards the end of 
the artist's life retain the exaggeration of caricature, which verges 
on the grotesque. The ``Woman's Head with Green Eyes'' (1915), a feline 
portrait seen from above, could be an advertisement for a revue at 
Isherwood's Kit-Kat Club in Berlin. But by the end of World War I, 
or perhaps because of it, the human figure has been de-emphasized 
in favor of transcendental visions of sea, sky and sail, with thin 
blocks of color laid atop one another, and prismatic views of churches 
and other buildings. These are most successful, in my view, when Feininger 
was working from memory, often long after last seeing a subject. Time 
and distance refined impurities from the images, lending them an otherworldly 
clarity. The series called ``Calm at Sea'' (1926-1929) shows Feininger 
at his most commanding. In ``Calm at Sea II,'' three sailboats and 
four figures on the shoreline in the foreground occupy perhaps a tenth 
of the canvas; the real subject is the azure-blue sea and the copper-hued 
sky. In ``Calm at Sea III,'' however, the focus is one of three sloops, 
painted plum red against a sky divided by its sails into blocks of 
gold and midnight blue. When Feininger tried working from photographs, 
as in a series of portrayals of the city of Halle, the precision is 
there, but it doesn't add up to nearly as much _ which is paradoxical, 
since Feininger was a skilled photographer, and his brother, Andreas, 
was one of the stars of Life magazine's photo team. Settling in New 
York in 1937, he at first refrained from painting. But eventually 
he found in the skyscrapers and street canyons of Manhattan some of 
the eerie romance he had felt decades earlier in the alleys and the 
churches of Thuringia in southern Germany. Using spidery lines that 
recall Mark Tobey and Paul Klee, he painted canvases that reflected 
not only the menacing clamor that he found in New York, but also something 
of its star-spangled glamour. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>