<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Chicago program has significantly improved the dangerously low immunization 
rates among the city's poor children through incentives that require 
parents to report to authorities monthly, instead of quarterly, to 
receive federal food vouchers. Once the children receive the appropriate 
vaccinations, the parents are allowed to return to quarterly vouchers, 
under an interagency program that for the first time links local immunization 
efforts to federal food distribution. Results of the project were 
reported in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association. 
Immunization rates among the 13,760 children, all two years old or 
younger, increased from 56 percent to 89 percent over the 15 months 
when parents or guardians were required to report monthly to receive 
the vouchers. The ongoing program began in June 1996. When the parents 
report to authorities to receive their vouchers, health workers warn 
them about the risks children face without immunizations and tell 
them where the children can receive free shots. Sometimes the shots 
are even provided at the same office. But among a comparison group 
of 2,821 children whose guardians had to report only quarterly to 
receive their food vouchers, the immunization rate remained substantially 
unchanged over the 15 months, even though that group received the 
same counseling and services, according to the journal report. Since 
the results were documented, those children and their families have 
been moved to the monthly incentive program. Dr. Edward Hoekstra and 
Dr. Charles LeBaron of the federal Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, who conceived and helped coordinate the $271,000 Chicago 
project, said in the journal article that the agencies' staffs were 
crucial to the project. Until now, LeBaron said in an interview, government 
agency collaboration had been difficult for various bureaucratic and 
budgetary reasons. ``This program shows,'' he said, ``that with such 
collaboration some very simple methods can have a major impact on 
health.'' The perils of low immunization rates became clear in the 
1989-91 measles epidemic in the United States when 55,000 people contracted 
the disease and 130 died from it. Since then, immunization rates have 
risen in much of the nation, an average of more than 80 percent, but 
lag behind in some poor urban communities, where the rate is as much 
as 30 percent. Chicago's immunization project was run by the city's 
Department of Public Health and the agency known as Supplemental Nutrition 
for Women, Infants and Children, or WIC. The WIC program, set up in 
the 1960s, is coordinated by the United States Department of Agriculture, 
which makes available surplus farm products. The Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention conceived the incentive program and assisted 
local officials in carrying it out. Dr. Philip Landrigan, a pediatrician 
and head of the Department of Community and Preventative Medicine 
at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, praised the results. ``The 
lesson,'' he said, ``is that if this program of incentive intervention 
and cooperation between government agencies can work in Chicago, it 
can be exported and used elsewhere.'' But Dr. David Wood of the Shriners 
Hospital for Children in Tampa, Fla., and Dr. Neal Haflon of the School 
of Medicine at the University of California at Los Angeles, in an 
accompanying journal editorial, cautioned against quick generalizations 
about possibly expanding the program. They said a number of special 
circumstances might have been at work in Chicago, including close 
interagency cooperation, that could be difficult to duplicate elsewhere. 
Still, Wood said in an interview, ``The need for what was accomplished 
in Chicago was just huge.'' The program includes vaccinations against 
whooping cough, polio, mumps, diphtheria and tetanus. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>