<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0321 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Smiling broadly beneath her headscarf, Nafize Cayer leaned over a 
table in front of Istanbul's City Hall on a recent afternoon and signed 
a petition of support for her embattled mayor. ``Everyone is crying 
over what has happened,'' lamented Mrs. Cayer, a 48-year-old housewife 
from a poor neighborhood. ``We are very angry. His only crime was 
to work for God.'' A 10-month jail sentence against the mayor, Recep 
Tayyip Erdogan, for ``provoking religious hatred'' was recently upheld 
by an appeals court. The sentence includes a lifetime ban on political 
activity. Until recently Erdogan, 44, had been considered one of Turkey's 
most promising young political leaders. He is the most popular younger 
figure in the pro-Islamic political movement and the idol of many 
believers. Until his conviction, he was considered likely to assume 
leadership of the movement from former Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan, 
75, who was forced to resign last year because of his advocacy of 
Islamic politics and who is now banned from political activity. Now 
Erdogan is Turkey's newest political martyr, the latest victim of 
a military-backed campaign against religious fundamentalism. His ostensible 
crime was making a speech last year in which he read a verse from 
a poem written in the 1920s: ``The mosques are our barracks, the minarets 
are our spears, their domes are our helmets and the faithful are our 
army.'' Soon afterward, he was brought before the National Security 
Court, a military-backed tribunal that tries cases related to subversion, 
and was convicted of having called for religious insurrection. Saying 
or writing the wrong thing can still be dangerous in Turkey. A historian 
is in jail for writing books supporting Kurdish nationalism and blaming 
Ottoman forces for the mass killing of Armenian civilians in 1915. 
A journalist is serving time for comparing a Kurdish guerrilla leader 
to Garibaldi, and a playwright was convicted of ``insulting the military.'' 
Under normal circumstances Erdogan would probably begin serving his 
jail term in a few months. His is no normal case, however, and political 
considerations could easily speed up the process. After he is imprisoned, 
the City Council is to choose a successor to serve until the next 
election, which is scheduled for April. His 10-month sentence means 
that he will probably serve only about 18 weeks. The U.S. consul in 
Istanbul, Carolyn Huggins, paid a call on Erdogan after he lost his 
appeal last month, and was later quoted in Turkish newspapers as calling 
the case ``a serious matter'' that would ``weaken confidence in Turkish 
democracy.'' In a quick reply, the Foreign Ministry asked the United 
States to refrain from commenting about what it described as Turkey's 
internal affairs. The rise of Islamic political power has been the 
subject of intense debate in Turkey for several years. Turkey was 
established as a secular republic in 1923, and military commanders 
consider themselves duty-bound to resist what they view as efforts 
to pull the country back to its theocratic past. But leaders of the 
religious party, formerly called Welfare and now known as Virtue, 
say they are merely responding to the desire of many Turks for a greater 
religious voice in public affairs. Uncertain when the police will 
knock on his door, Erdogan is soon to begin an open-ended tour of 
Turkey during which he hopes to give a last round of speeches that 
will keep his supporters thinking of him while he is imprisoned. Military 
officers and public prosecutors will be watching his every word. ``I 
have to be very careful about what words I use,'' Erdogan said at 
his City Hall office as people on the sidewalk below signed petitions 
of solidarity. ``It is a very strange position to be in.'' Erdogan's 
office is curtained, and he cannot see the nearby Roman aqueduct or 
any of the glorious Byzantine and Ottoman buildings around it. Nor 
can he see the tables where his supporters, many of whom are recent 
migrants from the more traditional rural areas of Turkey, line up 
to sign solidarity petitions. The lack of distractions apparently 
helps him cultivate the private intensity that is one of his trademarks. 
Like most Turks on both sides of the widening chasm that separates 
secularists from fundamentalists, Erdogan believes that his true crime 
was not reading a poem, but emerging as crown prince of the Islamic 
political movement. Military commanders and their civilian allies 
in the government are determined to decapitate and crush that movement. 
``The poem was just pretext,'' Erdogan said. ``My prosecution was 
aimed at blocking me or turning people against me.'' By law, Turkish 
politicians convicted of serious crimes while in office are forbidden 
ever to re-enter politics. In the past, however, political bans have 
been relaxed or lifted after years have passed. ``No politician can 
be artificially removed from the scene,'' Erdogan asserted. ``The 
nation brings politicians up, and only the nation can bring them down.'' 
In Istanbul neighborhoods where Islamic political power is strong, 
banners have been hung that say, ``Poetry-Reading Man, You Deserve 
a Medal.'' Posters bear Erdogan's portrait and the slogan, from a 
speech he made to supporters after losing his appeal: ``This song 
is not over yet!'' The military officers who hold ultimate power in 
Turkey believe that religious fundamentalism has become a social and 
political cancer that must be excised if the secular republic is to 
survive. They have supported a series of anti-fundamentalist campaigns, 
including an unpopular ban on the wearing of headscarves by women 
who are university students. Many political leaders, including Prime 
Minister Mesut Yalmaz, have publicly expressed doubts about the campaign 
against headscarves. Military officers insist that such campaigns 
are vital if Turkey is to defend its secular democracy. Others warn 
that the military is polarizing the country and will, in the end, 
turn voters toward the Islamic movement rather than away from it. 
``I'd like to see the army put its arms around the fundamentalists 
and say, `Hey, we're all Turks, let's work this thing out and live 
peacefully,''' said a foreign diplomat with many friends in the officer 
corps. ``But that isn't going to happen.'' One unexpected result of 
the campaign against fundamentalism here is the effect it has had 
on the views that Islamic-oriented politicians hold about human rights 
and democracy. They now speak constantly about these issues, and about 
the need to build a society in which every point of view is respected. 
``A lot of these people know the United States and the West only by 
certain stereotypes,'' said Soli Ozel, a professor of political science 
at Bilgi University in Istanbul. ``Now they are getting a different 
view of the West and the value it places on political freedoms. It's 
a new factor for them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>