<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Anyone who subscribes to the sentimental fallacy that great artists 
are nicer people than the rest of us (the reasoning goes that because 
they supposedly feel more than ordinary mortals, they must be nobler 
and more caring) hasn't met many great artists. If anything, the reverse 
tends to be true: the obsessive pursuit of an artistic idea more often 
than not involves a ruthless tunnel vision that screens out anything 
that isn't useful to the work or to the career. ``Love Is the Devil,'' 
John Maybury's searing portrait of the English painter Francis Bacon 
(Derek Jacobi) at the height of his fame in the 1960s, is one of the 
nastiest and most truthful portraits of the artist-as-monster ever 
filmed. Its story of the colossally self-absorbed painter and his 
self-destructive younger lover, George Dyer (Daniel Craig), begins 
when Bacon awakens in his studio one night to discover a burglar on 
the premises. Sizing up the thief as an appetizing piece of rough 
trade, Bacon makes a proposition: if the robber sheds his clothes 
and comes to bed with him, he promises, he can have anything he wants. 
The next thing you know, they're a couple. Bacon craves being totally 
dominated by other men, but the most you see of him acting out this 
fantasy is in an early scene where Bacon kneels over a bed while George 
knots a belt around his fist and aims a lighted cigarette at his bare 
back. Later in the film, he attends a boxing match where he watches 
intensely as one fighter smashes the other in the head, splattering 
a jet of blood onto Bacon's ecstatic face. But the movie also makes 
clear that the dynamics of dominance and submission work both ways. 
Outside the bedroom, Bacon is relentlessly controlling of his lover, 
who falls to pieces. Bacon refers dismissively to George as his ``odd 
job man,'' and locks him out of the house when he's entertaining other 
sexual partners. When George tells Bacon he loves him, the artist 
wonders out loud what bad television show those lines came from. Bacon 
is similarly high-handed with his circle of friends, whom the movie 
portrays as a viperish nest of supercilious hangers-on. ``Champagne 
for my real friends; real pain for my sham friends,'' Bacon caustically 
announces in one of several scenes of nocturnal carousal. When a young 
painter who idolizes Bacon begs him to come see his work, Bacon retorts 
that the young man's taste in neckties is proof he couldn't possibly 
have any talent. In Jacobi's uncompromising hard-edged performance, 
you can feel the cold fury burning behind Bacon's glare. What makes 
``Love Is the Devil'' more than a disturbingly rancid love story is 
John Mathieson's brilliant cinematography, which saturates the film 
with Bacon's corrosive artistic vision. Although ``Love Is the Devil'' 
doesn't show any of Bacon's work, the look of the entire film resembles 
a Bacon painting. Acidic lighting throws the characters' faces into 
harsh relief, often shadowing their eyes and making their flesh appear 
to crumble. Certain images become Baconesque diptychs and triptychs 
through the use of mirrors. Some scenes are photographed through distorting 
lenses that stretch faces into sinister masks that dissolve and decompose. 
In a recurrent fantasy image of George, he is a flayed, bloodied figure 
leaping from a diving board into the void. Here and there, the movie 
stumbles, and you can sense the budgetary constraints (a trip to the 
United States is indicated only by a picture of an American flag in 
the background). But in presuming to take you inside the mind and 
heart of a major artist, confronting the demonic aspect of the human 
condition, ``Love Is the Devil'' goes as far and as deep as any movie 
has dared. PRODUCTION NOTES: `LOVE IS THE DEVIL' Written and directed 
by John Maybury; director of photography, John Mathieson; music by 
Ryuichi Sakamoto; production designer, Alan MacDonald; produced by 
Chiara Menage; released by Strand Releasing. Running time: 91 minutes. 
Rating: This film is not rated. WITH: Derek Jacobi (Francis Bacon), 
Daniel Craig (George Dyer), Tilda Swinton (Muriel Belcher), Anne Lambton 
(Isabel Rawsthorne), Adrian Scarborough (Daniel Farson), Karl Johnson 
(John Deakin) and Annabel Brooks (Henrietta Moraes). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>