<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One one level, it is absurd, even insulting, to try to reduce an entire 
cuisine to a few ingredients. But, in fact, so many of the world's 
exciting cuisines do have signature combinations and flavors. For 
instance, any cook presented with olive oil, lemon, parsley, garlic 
and tomatoes and a few directions could well be on the way toward 
a terrific Western European dish. And it will have about it a sense 
of reassuring familiarity. Not so with many Asian dishes. Even reasonably 
accomplished cooks sometimes find themselves trembling with trepidation 
as they dip into Eastern cookery. But core combinations and flavors 
are there just the same: with only a handful of Thai ingredients, 
and most of them available in supermarkets, you can duplicate or improve 
dishes found in the typical neighborhood Thai restaurant. There are 
a few ingredients that will be unfamiliar to most American cooks, 
but the dishes I offer here are consistent with the minimalist mission: 
even though there is very little fuss, the results are fabulous. However, 
I won't pretend that they offer anything like the true breadth of 
the cuisine. Thailand, like Italy, is a country of many regional cuisines. 
There are areas that feature cumin, cloves, cinnamon, nutmeg and other 
spices we associate with India; areas where an abundance of chilies 
makes the food fiercely hot, and still others that rely heavily on 
fresh green peppercorns. The country's geography insures that there 
is no one true Thai cuisine. So the approach I offer here is necessarily 
selective, though not without its logic. Just as the cuisines of Paris 
and Rome are amalgams of the regional cuisines of their countries, 
the flavors we most often think of as belonging to Thailand are those 
of Bangkok. Taken from the Bangkok perspective, and for the sake of 
this discussion putting aside distinct regional differences, there 
are a relatively small number of ingredients that can serve to define 
Thai cooking. And there are a couple of overriding principles. Many 
Thai dishes are not unlike what we call curries, but although they 
may contain curry powder, they are more often based on a combination 
of herbs and aromatic vegetables rather than dried spices. A typical 
dish might feature a mixture of garlic, shallots, chilies, lime leaf, 
sugar and galangal (or ginger). This intense flavor combination features 
three basic flavors _ sweet, sour and salty. Chilies, which provide 
heat (not exactly a flavor), are also ubiquitous, but their quantity 
is easily and frequently varied according to taste. During my visit 
to Thailand last winter, several local residents insisted that I would 
be wise to learn how to say ``not too hot'' in Thai, because most 
restaurant food is fiery. A search through my notes finds the word 
``hot'' used on almost every line. Herbs are used to freshen dishes, 
but the trinity of sweet (usually palm sugar or coconut milk, but 
often ordinary sugar), salty (in the form of nam pla, or fish sauce, 
and salt) and sour (lime in several forms, and also tamarind) is all-important, 
and ideally well balanced. Thus a common snack that perfectly exemplifies 
the proclivities of the Thai palate is sliced green mango (which is 
sour) dipped in a mixture of salt, sugar and chili. Even desserts 
may combine all these flavors; I was served sweet bean pancakes spiked 
with chilies and a garnish of shallots and lime. Rice is served at 
most meals; noodles, which are also popular, are not considered indigenous. 
(Asked about pad Thai, the noodle dish found in almost every Thai 
restaurant in America, one chef said to me, ``That's not even Thai, 
it's Chinese.'') There is short-grain rice (which can be cooked like 
a long-grain rice, using a ratio of two parts water to one part rice), 
but even more popular is sticky rice, also called glutinous or sweet 
rice. It is served not only with savory dishes but also as a dessert. 
It is great stuff, and well worth trying. While the recipes here provide 
a sense of the basics of Thai cooking, the principles can be reduced 
even further. Just cook a basic stir-fry or stew of your choice but 
flavor it with garlic, galangal or ginger, chilies, lemon grass and 
lime, and finish it with nam pla. The dish, I promise, will be just 
about as legitimate as the stuff you have been ordering from the Thai 
takeout place on the corner _ and it may be a lot more satisfying, 
too. LEMON-GRASS-GINGER SOUP WITH MUSHROOMS Time: 30 minutes 6 cups 
chicken stock 3 stalks lemon grass 4 nickel-size slices ginger 3 or 
4 small hot chilies, minced 2 tablespoons nam pla (fish sauce), or 
to taste 6 to 8 ounces roughly chopped oyster mushrooms 2 teaspoons 
minced lime leaves or lime zest Juice of 1 lime \ cup minced cilantro 
leaves. 1. Heat the stock over medium heat. Trim two of the lemon-grass 
stalks of their toughest outer layers, then bruise them with the back 
of a knife; cut them into sections, and add them to the stock with 
the ginger and about \ of the minced chilies. Simmer for about 15 
minutes, longer if you have the time. Peel all the hard layers off 
the remaining stalk of lemon grass, and mince its tender inner core. 
2. When you're ready to eat the soup, remove the lemon grass and ginger. 
Add 1 tablespoon nam pla and the chopped mushrooms. Taste the broth, 
and add more chilies if you like, as well as some salt if necessary. 
In the bottom of each of 4 warmed bowls, sprinkle a little each of 
the chile, lime leaves or zest, lime juice, cilantro and minced lemon 
grass. 3. Ladle the soup into the bowls and add a teaspoon of nam 
pla to each bowl. Serve piping hot. Yield: 4 servings. STEWED SPICY 
CHICKEN WITH LEMON GRASS AND LIME Time: 45 minutes 2 tablespoons peanut 
or vegetable oil { cup minced shallot 1 tablespoon minced garlic 1 
tablespoon minced galangal, or ginger 1 teaspoon minced hot chili, 
or crushed red pepper flakes, or to taste 1 teaspoon turmeric 1 teaspoon 
ground dried coriander 1 teaspoon sugar 2 stalks lemon grass 1 3-pound 
chicken, cut into serving pieces Salt and freshly ground black pepper 
1 tablespoon minced lime leaves or zest 2 tablespoons nam pla \ cup 
minced cilantro leaves. 1. Place the oil in a large, deep skillet, 
and turn the heat to medium. Add the shallot, garlic, ginger and chilies, 
and cook, stirring frequently, until the vegetables are tender and 
the mixture pasty. Add the turmeric, coriander and sugar, and cook, 
stirring, for another minute. Trim the lemon-grass stalks of their 
toughest outer layers, then bruise them with the back of a knife; 
cut them into sections, and add them to the mixture along with 1 cup 
of water. 2. Add the chicken, and turn it once or twice in the sauce; 
then, nestle it in the sauce. Season with a little salt and pepper. 
Turn the heat to low, and cover the skillet. Cook, turning once or 
twice, until the chicken is cooked through, 20 to 30 minutes. 3. Uncover 
the skillet, and raise the heat to medium-high; turn the chicken skin-side 
down. Let most (but not all) of the liquid evaporate, and brown the 
chicken just a little on the bottom. Stir in the lime leaves and nam 
pla. Taste, and adjust seasoning as necessary; then, garnish with 
cliantro and serve with white rice. Yield: 4 servings. VEGETARIAN 
RICE NOODLES WITH BASIL Time: 40 minutes 12 ounces rice-stick noodles 
2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil 1 tablespoon minced garlic 1 
teaspoon minced hot chilies, or crushed red pepper flakes, or to taste 
1 teaspoon sugar Salt and freshly ground black pepper 2 tablespoons 
nam pla, or to taste 1 tablespoon lime juice, or to taste { cup roughly 
chopped Thai or other basil or mint. 1. Soak the rice noodles in hot 
water to cover for about 30 minutes. Meanwhile, bring a pot of water 
to a boil. When the noodles are soft, drain them and then immerse 
them in the boiling water for about 30 seconds. Drain and rinse. 2. 
Heat the oil in a deep skillet (preferably nonstick) over medium-high 
heat. Add the garlic and chilies, and cook about 30 seconds, stirring. 
Raise the heat to high, add the noodles and sugar and toss to coat. 
Season with salt and pepper. 3. When the noodles are hot, add the 
nam pla and lime juice. Taste and adjust seasonings, then stir in 
the basil or mint and serve. Yield: 4 servings. SHRIMP IN YELLOW CURRY 
Time: 30 minutes 2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil 1 cup minced 
onion 1 tablespoon minced garlic 1 tablespoon minced galangal or ginger 
1 teaspoon minced hot chili, or crushed red pepper flakes, or to taste 
1 tablespoon curry powder, or to taste 1 cup fresh or canned coconut 
milk 1{ to 2 pounds medium-to-large shrimp, peeled Salt and freshly 
ground black pepper 2 tablespoons nam pla, or to taste \ cup minced 
cilantro or mint leaves. 1. Place the oil in a large, deep skillet, 
and turn the heat to medium. Add the onion, garlic, ginger and chilies, 
and cook, stirring frequently, until the vegetables are tender and 
the mixture pasty. Add the curry, and cook, stirring, another minute. 
2. Add the coconut milk, and raise the heat to medium-high. Cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the mixture is nearly dry. Add the shrimp, 
a few pinches of salt and a little black pepper, and cook, stirring 
frequently, until the shrimp release their liquid (the mixture will 
become quite moist again) and turn pink. 3. Add half the nam pla, 
stir, then taste and add the rest if necessary. Garnish with cilantro 
and serve with white or sticky rice. Yield: 4 servings. The Short 
List for Thai Ingredients Putting together a basic Thai pantry requires 
a short shopping list, and perhaps a trip to an Asian grocer, although 
many of these ingredients are also sold in supermarkets. CHILIES _ 
Typically small and very hot. Use crushed red pepper flakes if necessary. 
(Wear latex gloves when handling chilies, or wash your hands very 
thoroughly afterward.) COCONUT MILK _ Sold canned, which is most convenient 
(there is even a low-fat version), but it can be made at home: Combine 
1 cup dried (unsweetened) coconut with 1 cup boiling water in a blender. 
Carefully blend for about 15 seconds, then let sit for 10 minutes. 
Strain and use the milk. (You can repeat the process with the same 
grated coconut to make a second, thinner batch of milk if you like.) 
GALANGAL _ A close relative of ginger, though somewhat more pungent. 
Ginger is a good substitute. HERBS _ Cilantro, mint or basil (especially 
the exceptionally fragrant Thai basil) are common garnishes. Not strictly 
interchangeable, but you can cheat. LEMON GRASS _ Long, scallion-like 
stalks with irreplaceable flavor (no cheating here). To use, peel 
the toughest outer layers and bruise the stalk with the back of a 
knife. Or peel all the tough layers to expose the tender inner core, 
and mince. LIME LEAVES _ Sold fresh or dried; fresh are far superior. 
Lime zest may be used as a substitute. NAM PLA _ The ubiquitous fish 
sauce, made from fermented fish and salt and often used in place of 
all or most of the salt in a dish. RICE NOODLES _ Use rice sticks, 
which are linguine-to-fettuccine size, for most purposes. Cook as 
in the Vegetarian Rice Noodles With Basil recipes on this page. STICKY 
RICE _ Delicious, lightly sweet rice that requires unusual handling. 
To serve four, soak one and a half to two cups of rice for an hour 
in water to cover. Wrap in cheesecloth (or a clean kitchen towel) 
and steam over boiling water in a covered pot for about 10 minutes, 
or until tender. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>