<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When it comes to garden-fresh tomatoes, it's annual separation-anxiety 
time. Next week, maybe even this weekend, the last of the summer's 
sun-ripened beauties will be gone, and we'll be back to imports and 
hothouse tomatoes. Or no tomatoes: purists would argue, particularly 
after this summer's lush crop, that anything other than local, seasonal 
tomatoes isn't worth the bother. One way to say a fond, lingering 
goodbye to the season's tomatoes is to slow-roast some tomato halves 
until they become shrunken disks of concentrated flavor. There is 
a double bonus here _ not just the celebration of flavor, but also 
the irresistibly seductive perfume that fills the house. Slow-baked 
tomatoes are a classic dish in France, particularly in Provence, where 
tomatoes are, if not the staff of life, then a large part of it. But 
duplicating the classic technique in my New York kitchen was not easy. 
When standard recipes were followed, the tomatoes fell apart or were 
bitter, too chewy or too tough to eat. After repeated failures, it 
became apparent that the trick is to get rid of the seeds (which can 
become bitter) and some of the moisture before cooking the tomatoes. 
And keeping them warm until serving time, a subtlety that makes a 
big difference. Paula Wolfert, the cookbook author and specialist 
in all things Mediterranean, suggested salting the tomatoes to get 
rid of excess water and then keeping them in the turned-off oven until 
mealtime. Slow-roasted this way, the tomato halves become small bites, 
almost caramelized, more sweet than acid. To preserve real tomatoes 
well into winter, homemade tomato sauce is justifiably the time-honored 
way. I've always been partial to Alice Waters' roasted-red-tomato 
sauce with its deep, fresh flavor. Roasting the tomatoes first gives 
the finished sauce an earthy edge you won't get otherwise. If you 
have on hand Matthew Kenney's tomato jam, a sort of North African 
salsa, you're ready to conquer almost any meal. Cooked with spices, 
hot pepper, garlic and honey, the tomatoes make a smooth, thick sauce, 
an elegant balance of sweet, spicy and hot that upgrades just about 
anything. At his restaurant Matthew's, on Third Avenue at 61st Street, 
the jam is used as a marinade _ rubbed into chicken before it is grilled 
_ and as a chutney with shrimp; it is also used as a sauce for steamed 
fish. And at his cafe, Mezze, on 44th Street, it is the key ingredient 
in the Moroccan spiced chicken sandwich served on flat bread. You 
might also consider using tomato jam as a sauce for vegetables, a 
spread on toasted pita, a dip mixed into cottage cheese or _ this 
is a real early-morning eye-opener _ a topping on a half bagel smeared 
with cream cheese. And about those seasonal leftovers, green tomatoes. 
John Martin Taylor, a cookbook author in Charleston, S.C., suggested 
a way of using green tomatoes that puts a new spin on the last of 
the season's crop _ the unripe ones that backyard gardeners rescue 
from the vines right before the first frost. ``Don't deseed them, 
but just cut them up in wedges, salt and pepper them, mix them with 
a little olive oil and throw them in a 350-degree oven for about 30 
minutes,'' said Taylor, who is known as Hoppin' John. The roasted 
green wedges don't entirely collapse; they just melt down into juicy 
wedges, soft, sweet and succulent. Taylor is not trying to replace 
fried green tomatoes, a favorite of his, which, he said, the movie 
helped make into a fixture on diner menus in his neck of the woods. 
But anyone who tries roasted green tomatoes may have a hard time going 
back to the pan-fried kind. Roasted green tomatoes are so good, in 
fact, that they suggest a sequel. SLOW-ROASTED TOMATOES Adapted from 
Paula Wolfert Time: 3{ hours 8 medium-size red tomatoes Fine sea salt 
5 tablespoons olive oil 4 garlic cloves, peeled and minced { cup roughly 
chopped flat-leaf parsley. 1. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees. Cut 
the tomatoes in half horizontally. Squeeze each half gently over the 
sink to extract as many seeds as possible. Salt each half liberally, 
turn them upside down and drain them for 30 minutes on a cake rack 
set over a tray. Squeeze gently again to get rid of any excess moisture. 
2. Using 3 tablespoons olive oil, brush a nonmetallic gratin dish 
large enough to hold all the tomato halves in one layer. Add tomatoes, 
cut sides up. Cook on middle level of oven for 2{ hours. If they are 
cooking too fast (if the oil begins to sizzle), lower heat to 275 
degrees. 3. In small bowl mix minced garlic and parsley, and add 1 
tablespoon olive oil. Remove tomatoes from oven, and press equal amounts 
of garlic-parsley mixture into each tomato top, pressing down lightly 
with back of spoon. Drizzle remaining tablespoon of olive oil over 
tomatoes, and return to oven for 20 more minutes. Turn off heat, but 
let tomatoes stay in oven until serving time. Yield: 6 servings. ROASTED 
RED TOMATO SAUCE Adapted from ``Chez Panisse Vegetables'' by Alice 
Waters; HarperCollins, 1996; $32.50 Time: 1{ hours 2 pounds ripe tomatoes 
\ cup olive oil 1 large yellow onion, peeled and sliced 1 medium-size 
leek, washed, trimmed and diced 1 small carrot, peeled and diced 1 
head of garlic, cut in half horizontally 1 bay leaf 1 sprig thyme 
1 small bunch basil (about \ pound) Salt and freshly ground black 
pepper to taste. 1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Cut out a cone at 
stem end of each tomato to remove core. Cut tomatoes into quarters. 
Spread them in baking dish. Toss tomatoes with half the olive oil, 
and roast them, uncovered, for 30 minutes, stirring them up several 
times. The tomatoes are cooked when flesh is very soft and skin separates 
easily from flesh. 2. Heat remaining olive oil in stainless-steel 
or other nonreactive pot. Add onion, leek, carrot and garlic, and 
cook over medium heat until completely soft, about 10 minutes. Add 
roasted tomatoes and herbs. Simmer, stirring frequently, to prevent 
scorching, until flavors come together, 30 to 45 minutes. Pass sauce 
through food mill, and adjust seasoning with salt and pepper. 3. Heat 
gently to use as sauce for pasta, grains or vegetables. If refrigerated 
in covered container, sauce will keep for a week; if frozen, for several 
months. Yield: 1 quart. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>