<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0319 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia vowed Tuesday to veto any attempt by the United Nations to 
sanction air strikes against Yugoslavia and warned of ``serious international 
consequences'' if NATO proceeds with force to halt the ethnic conflict 
in Kosovo Province. Russia's stepped-up effort to insert itself into 
the diplomatic wrangling over Kosovo comes as Russian officials in 
Washington and elsewhere are pressing the West to rescue their foundering 
economy. The paradox was not lost on Russian commentators, who questioned 
the timing of Moscow's latest bid to assert itself as a rival to the 
Western military alliance. ``It is difficult to act as a great power 
when you constantly beg for aid,'' Georgi Arbatov, a retired foreign 
policy expert and veteran of cold war diplomacy, told a Russian news 
agency. Russia's latest diplomatic stance comes in an atmosphere of 
increasingly open hostility toward the West, which is often blamed 
here for promoting policies that have led to the Russian economy's 
near collapse. Despite the country's weakened position _ or maybe 
because of it _ Russia's dialogue with the West has taken on a sharper, 
even bullying edge, on issues ranging from bad debts to foreign policy. 
Russia has opposed the use of force by Western allies in previous 
diplomatic impasses, including against the Bosnian Serbs in 1995 and 
last year against Iraq. With the architect of Russia's hardline foreign 
policy, Yevgeny Primakov, now installed as prime minister, that policy 
carries more weight than ever. But in lining up against the Western 
alliance, Primakov risks antagonizing the governments whose economic 
help he is now seeking. In looking to avert a military showdown over 
Yugoslavia, Russia is also seen as trying to reassert itself as an 
indispensable and independent player on the international scene. In 
an interview Tuesday with the Russian news agency Interfax, Foreign 
Minister Igor Ivanov said Russia would ``definitely'' use its veto 
on the United Nations Security Council to block any U.N.-sanctioned 
strike against Yugoslavia. ``A military strike will not help normalize 
the situation but will have the opposite effect,'' he said. President 
Boris Yeltsin also made a round of phone calls to Western leaders 
and U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan urging them to use diplomacy 
rather than force in stopping further bloodshed in Kosovo, where Serbian 
forces, deployed by the government in Belgrade, are accused of committing 
atrocities against ethnic Albanians. In the Communist-dominated Russian 
Parliament, the tone was more strident, and belligerently anti-Western. 
Parliamentary Speaker Gennady Seleznyov said Tuesday that the Parliament 
would move to break its treaty with NATO if the alliance attacked 
Yugoslavia. ``If they start bombing, a war will simply begin,'' said 
Seleznyov. ``Yugoslavia will respond accordingly and fire at their 
planes, if they appear above Yugoslav territory.'' Russia has historic 
ties to Serbia, and Russian nationalists have been quick to side with 
their Orthodox brethren against what they see as the West's undiscriminating 
antagonism to Belgrade. Russian diplomats have tried to use their 
influence on Yugoslavian President Slobodan Milosevic to get him to 
back off his aggressive strategies, and negotiate for peaceful settlements. 
Last weekend, Ivanov and Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev flew to Belgrade 
for another meeting with Milosevic. A foreign ministry spokesman said 
they warned him that NATO air strikes were likely ``if decisive measures 
are not immediately taken for a radical improvement of the situation.'' 
In warning the West not to strike Yugoslavia, Russian officials have 
issued vague threats of their own. Ivanov said in a television interview 
on Monday that military action could lead to serious consequences, 
while the deputy head of the armed forces general staff, Col Gen. 
Vladislav Putilin, said the Russian military was ready to carry out 
``any order'' from the Kremlin over Kosovo. What such an order might 
be, he did not say. In recent public statements, members of the Primakov 
government have argued that the International Monetary Fund and other 
institutions should give Russia more money to compensate for their 
bad advice. Some have also tried more aggressive tactics, saying that 
the Western banks and governments could find themselves stuck with 
billions of dollars in Russian debt if more aid is not forthcoming. 
But Russia's current economic turmoil, and the uncertain policies 
of the Primakov government, have undercut its international standing, 
adding a note of bitterness to its internal foreign policy debate. 
Alexander Shokhin, a centrist politician who served briefly in the 
Primakov government and heads the Our Home Is Russia party faction 
in the Parliament, Tuesday called the crisis over Kosovo ``a dramatic 
turning point in defining Russia's role in the world.'' ``If we want 
to be taken into account in the world,'' said Shokhin, ``we must learn 
to influence our allies, including Milosevic.'' Arbatov, former head 
of the Institute of U.S. and Canada Studies, noted that Russia today 
is ``not in a position to expect its opinion to be heeded,'' and should 
put its energies into pressing Milosevic to change course, and not 
on the West. ``Too many warnings have been given to the Yugoslav president 
by Western countries,'' he said. ``Thus the West has gone very far, 
and retreat would involve a loss of face.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>