<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0331 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The naming of G. Richard Wagoner Jr. on Tuesday as president and chief 
operating officer of General Motors shows how the world's largest 
corporation is changing _ and how it is not. In an industry that still 
views gray hair as a prerequisite for serious responsibility, Wagoner 
is a brown-haired 45-year-old. Wagoner made his reputation not in 
GM's established markets in North America and Western Europe but in 
its highly successful Brazilian subsidiary. He even plays basketball, 
not golf, and watches the basketball games of his alma mater, Duke 
University, at every opportunity. Yet in many ways, Wagoner is a younger 
version of the many finance-minded executives who have dominated GM 
since its inception in 1908. He went straight from Harvard Business 
School to a job as a financial analyst in the GM treasurer's office 
in 1977 and has worked for the auto maker ever since. Unlike many 
executives his age, he does not have a personal computer in his office; 
he relies on his secretary to print out the occasional electronic 
mail that he receives, although he does use a laptop computer at home. 
More important, he is sometimes criticized here for seeming to be 
more interested in profits and costs than in designing cars and light 
trucks that will fire customers' imaginations _ a terrible offense 
for some in Detroit, but one that Wagoner says is only partly true. 
``I know an ugly vehicle when I see one,'' he said while cheerfully 
acknowledging that design is not his strongest suit. ``In third grade, 
I drew a tree that my teacher said looked like a first grader's.'' 
But Wagoner has one of the stronger track records among GM executives. 
As treasurer, and then finance director and finally as president of 
operations in Brazil in the 1980s and early 1990s, Wagoner helped 
build a subsidiary whose vehicles were GM's most profitable until 
the recent economic downturn there. More recently, the North American 
operations have earned modest but growing profit margins under Wagoner 
despite fierce competition and a generally strong dollar, which makes 
it easier for foreign auto makers to offer discounts in the U.S. market. 
The decisions by the GM board to combine international and North American 
auto operations and to put Wagoner in charge of both and promote him 
to president of the corporation did not register favorably on Wall 
Street, where some had wanted the company to bring in fresh blood. 
GM's shares fell $2.50, to $51.25, after the announcement, while shares 
of the Ford Motor Co. and the Chrysler Corp. rose. As president of 
GM, Wagoner faces a tough task. The merger of Chrysler and Daimler-Benz 
AG creates another global competitor for GM. Though the dollar has 
slipped lately in currency markets, it remains fairly strong against 
the East Asian currencies of GM's main competitors. The company's 
market share in the United States has been falling since the 1960s, 
while its long-profitable international operations are suffering from 
weaker demand because of economic turmoil in many overseas markets. 
In combining its domestic and international auto manufacturing and 
marketing operations under Wagoner, GM is giving him a corporate empire 
with annual sales of $136 billion _ more than General Electric, Intel 
and Microsoft combined. The only GM businesses not reporting to Wagoner 
will be the vast auto parts subsidiary, which is to be spun off next 
year, and the automotive finance, heavy-truck transmission and railroad 
locomotive subsidiaries. Combining the domestic and overseas auto 
divisions will allow GM to eliminate seven top-level councils that 
were intended to coordinate the activities of the two operations. 
Wagoner said senior executives would be able to spend less time in 
meetings and flying to meetings and would be able to make decisions 
much faster as a result. George Richard Wagoner Jr. was born on Feb. 
9, 1953, in Wilmington, Del. He is married and drives a GMC Suburban. 
His broad new role, which covers 76 percent of the company's sales 
and includes a seat on the General Motors board, would seem to make 
him the heir apparent to John F. Smith Jr., the chairman and chief 
executive, who was president from 1992 until now. But Smith declined 
to say Tuesday whether Wagoner was in line to succeed him. ``All we're 
saying today is Rick has been promoted,'' Smith said at a news conference 
Tuesday morning. One of Smith's closest personal friends, Louis Hughes, 
had been executive vice president for international auto operations 
since 1992. Wagoner took over this responsibility Tuesday, and Hughes, 
while remaining an executive vice president, was given the job of 
handling the company's various partnerships with Toyota, Isuzu and 
other auto makers. Hughes, 49, accepted this apparent demotion gracefully, 
praising Wagoner's competence at the news conference and saying that 
he looked forward to working with him. Hughes will continue reporting 
directly to Smith. All 14 executives reporting to Wagoner will be 
Americans. In an interview, Wagoner noted that many of these senior 
executives had substantial international experience. That no foreigners 
made it into this elite tier of management at the world's largest 
multinational corporation, however, shows how slow GM has been to 
open up to outsiders. ``Clearly we've got to move with more foreign 
nationals,'' Wagoner said. One of the few relative outsiders in GM's 
senior ranks, Ronald Zarrella, a former president of Bausch &AMP; 
Lomb Inc., was promoted Tuesday to replace Wagoner as president of 
North American operations. Zarrella had been GM's group vice president 
for North American sales, service and marketing. At a company once 
led by hard-edged men who brooked no dissent, Wagoner uses basketball 
terminology to call for a more cooperative approach to management. 
``There's an analogy _ running a successful business today is a team 
sport,'' said Wagoner, who is 6 feet 4. ``If the center doesn't set 
the pick, the forward isn't going to be free to take the jump shot.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>