<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981006.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Unlike most of today's outdoorsmen, my dad hunted and fished for sustenance 
rather than sport. As soon as we were old enough, my brothers and 
I joined him in the fields and forests of upstate New York, bringing 
home deer, rabbit, pheasant, partridge and a host of other game birds. 
But it was only years later, as I trained to become a chef, that I 
learned truly to appreciate the complex flavor of game. And now, as 
it becomes more widely available in the market, game is becoming more 
popular among home cooks who aren't living as close to the land as 
I once did. Today, most game animals are raised on farms or in game 
preserves. It's true: farm-raised game and game birds do not have 
the subtlety of flavor of those taken in the wild. But they do have 
some advantages: they have a more assertive flavor than more familiar 
poultry, they are lean and they allow the cook to prepare game throughout 
the year. At the table, pheasant has a long history as the king of 
game birds, notably in classic French preparations like braised pheasant 
with wild mushrooms. Like all royalty, though, it requires careful 
handling. Pheasant, particularly the breast, quickly loses moisture 
when it is roasted. Instead, I like to give it a quick searing at 
high heat, which seals in the juices and creates a crisp crust. Muted, 
earthy kale and cabbage make a fine complement in flavor and texture. 
When they are young and tender, these hardy greens make splendid foils 
for delicate game. To add a little sophistication, I finish the dish 
with a subtle pan sauce of sweet sherry and pungent shallots infused 
with thyme, citrus and mint. In the end, the dish is a balance of 
the straightforward and the sophisticated, delicate and hearty: humble 
greens and royal bird. PHEASANT BREAST WITH HARDY GREENS Time: 1 hour 
\ cup plus 3 tablespoons shelled pistachios { pound fresh kale 6 boneless 
pheasant breasts, with skin Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper 
3 tablespoons corn oil 5 tablespoons minced shallots 2 teaspoons minced 
fresh thyme One-third cup sherry 1 cup rich chicken stock or low-sodium 
canned broth 6 tablespoons butter 1 pound savoy cabbage, roughly chopped 
6 sprigs fresh thyme, for garnish. 1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. 
Spread pistachios on baking sheet, and bake until slightly crisp and 
brown, about 5 minutes. Set aside. Bring large pot of water to boil. 
Add kale, and blanch for 10 seconds. Drain immediately, rinse with 
cold water, and drain again. Set aside. 2. Season pheasant breasts 
with salt and pepper to taste. In large saute pan over medium heat, 
heat corn oil, and add breasts with skin sides down. Sear until a 
crisp, golden crust forms, 6 to 7 minutes. Turn, and sear the other 
side for 4 to 5 more minutes. Remove breasts to warm platter, and 
cover lightly with foil to keep warm. 3. Return saute pan to medium 
heat. Add 3 tablespoons minced shallots and the minced thyme. Saute 
until shallots are softened, about 2 minutes. Add sherry, and stir 
to deglaze pan. Raise heat to medium-high, and simmer until sherry 
is slightly reduced, about 3 minutes. Stir in chicken stock, reduce 
heat to low, and simmer for 4 minutes. Whisk in 4 tablespoons butter, 
a tablespoon at a time, until smooth sauce forms. Adjust salt and 
pepper to taste, and keep warm. 4. In large saute pan over medium 
heat, melt remaining 2 tablespoons butter. Add remaining 2 tablespoons 
shallots, and saute until they soften, about 2 minutes. Add cabbage, 
kale and salt and pepper to taste. Reduce heat to low, and saute until 
greens are wilted and well coated with butter. Add \ cup pistachios, 
and toss to mix. Remove from heat. 5. To serve, place an equal amount 
of greens in center of each of six warm dinner plates. Place pheasant 
breast on top of each plate of greens. Drizzle pan sauce over pheasant 
and around edge of plate. Sprinkle each plate with some of remaining 
pistachios. Stick thyme sprig into each pheasant breast, and serve 
immediately. Yield: 6 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>