<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981006.2000.0947 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It started out as an innocent enough promotion. McDonald's in Hong 
Kong offered Snoopy dolls for an additional 75 cents a pop, or a pup, 
once you buy your burger and fries. But the dolls have become the 
Beanie Babies of Hong Kong, causing otherwise sane people to line 
up for hours to buy them. "The World's" Michael Sweido says it's kind 
of crazy. Each Snoopy is like this little three-inch plastic doll 
from different parts of the world. There's an American Snoopy, a Hong 
Kong Snoopy, a UK Snoopy, a China Snoopy. They have little costumes. 
People just eating them up. Are they eating up the McDonald's at the 
same time that they're eating up the Snoopys? In the beginning, there 
were stories of people going in and ordering 100 meals and then just 
dumping the food afterwards. Now, tell me, what is the appeal, do 
you think, to someone in Hong Kong of Snoopy? Snoopy is a, you know, 
he's an enduring cultural figure here in the United States, but not 
exactly one that people are salivating over. Well, if you ask people, 
they just say he's cute. He's fun, and Hong Kong people love cute 
things. And I'll tell you, it's really appealing to people of all 
ages. It's not just kids. I mean, I went down to the store this morning. 
I live in a pretty typical Hong Kong neighborhood. You know, it's 
not the center of town. There's a line wrapped around the corner. 
I asked the first person in the line how long he's been there. It's 
in the afternoon. He says, "I got here at 7:30 in the morning." The 
guy's been there for five hours to get the Snoopy doll. This is an 
interesting developing. When there's a fad in the United States, usually 
it's people wanting the object and then keeping it. But I guess in 
Hong Kong, everything can sort of become a commodity, huh? Well, this 
is Hong Kong. I mean, it's an entrepreneurial society. Back when the 
economy was doing good, right, people speculated on stocks. They speculated 
on property. Well, those things have gone bad. And what we have now 
in Hong Kong is Snoopy speculation. I went into the store. This woman 
is selling sets of the 20 figurines of the Snoopy dolls. A complete 
set sells for over 150 U.S. dollars. Some people are going to her 
shop, buying a little figurine for about 30 Hong Kong dollars, say 
about, let's see, that would be almost about 4 U.S. dollars. Going 
back out onto the street and selling it for about three times that 
much. These are items that are being, do you think, exported as well, 
or is this all kind of happening at a very contained way in Hong Kong? 
Well, it is related to the rest of the region in the sense that the 
same campaign was done in Thailand, in Singapore, in Taiwan, but it 
wasn't nearly as popular. But in a way it is now because, well, you 
know that in Hong Kong, these dolls are just, you know, they're selling 
like madfire, right? So people are going to Taiwan, they're going 
to Bangkok, they're going to Singapore, they bring the dolls back. 
For example, the woman in the collector's store, that's where she 
got her dolls to sell. Like I said, Hong Kong has this entrepreneurial 
spirit. There's a guy the local press is reporting, he's put up posters 
in one part of town, and he's offering to buy off of people the non-Snoopy 
components of the extra-value meals, i.e., the hamburger, the French 
fries and the soda. He's offering to pay $1.25 U.S. to take the food 
off of people's hands. The demand was so strong, he's lowered the 
price to 1 U.S. dollar. He's apparently taking the food to his office 
for a cheap office feed for lunch time. This is really a whole new 
idea of what the food chain is. It's very different in Hong Kong, 
isn't it? It definitely is, Tony. "The World's" Michael Sweido speaking 
with us from Hong Kong. Thanks a lot. Bye-bye. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>