<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981006.2000.0376 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States today continued a diplomatic and rhetorical drive 
to get Yugoslavia's president to end his crackdown on the secessionist 
Kosovo Liberation Army. In Washington, President Clinton said NATO 
is prepared to act if Slobodan Milosevic fails to pull his troops 
out of the Serbian province. Defense secretary William Cohen told 
Congress that NATO air strikes might be followed by some form of international 
presence on the ground. In Serbia, U.S. diplomat Richard Holbrooke 
shuttled between Kosovo for meetings with ethnic Albanian leaders 
and Belgrade for his second session with Milosevic in two days. Holbrooke 
said Serb military police maintain a strong presence in Kosovo, despite 
international demands that they get out. The view from Belgrade is, 
of course, quite different. "The World's Nenad Shebek is in the Yugoslav 
capital. It was warm and sunny in Belgrade today, and the city's fashionable 
street cafes were as full as ever, as people made the most of the 
Indian summer. But instead of chatting about the latest fashions, 
blockbuster movies or soccer results, almost everyone was talking 
about war and the possibility of air strikes by NATO. We are scared, 
all of us. We are looking into the state of our air raid shelters 
but are hoping that air strikes will not actually happen. I'm not 
afraid. But if it happens, what can one do? I believe that there will 
be air strikes. The West is intent on doing it, and no one can stop 
them. And no, I don't believe such action would be justified. Well, 
I'm not afraid. But I believe that the threat is quite real. Today, 
America does whatever it wants. It pays no attention to international 
laws or UN regulations. Whether they're afraid or not, many people 
are concerned enough to be stocking up on tinned food. In supermarkets, 
basic goods like cooking oil, sugar and flour are almost impossible 
to find. Almost everyone here feels that Serbia has been unjustly 
targeted for doing what any sovereign country in the world has the 
right to do -- to fight against a secessionist movement and defend 
its territory. Teyanas Meylovich, a reporter from a Belgrade weekly 
called The European, says there is also a lot of resignation. In the 
sense that, you know, everyone's been against the Serbs for so long, 
we 're not surprised that they're now coming after us in our own homeland, 
so to speak. But some people talking revenge and fighting back. There's 
-- in fact, in my opinion, to a surprising extent, there is this reaction 
that people want to fight back. The first targets of any revenge would 
be the local independent media, says Randall Frein from IRIX, a U.S.-based 
NGO helping out the independent media in Serbia. What worries me is 
the collateral damage that will come with air strikes. I'm not talking 
about bombs missing their targets. I'm talking about the reaction 
of nationalist politicians and of the Milosevic regime taken against 
independent journalists. There will be retribution. Everyone here 
believes it's highly likely. These are the people who are going to 
be out on the end of the limb when the bombs start falling. Very specific 
threats have been made against the independent media. The Serbian 
vice premier, Vojislav Seselj, has accused them of treason and of 
being foreign spies. The Ministry of Information has warned all radio 
and television stations which rebroadcast programs by the BBC, Voice 
of America and other international media that it will not tolerate 
what it calls "programs produced for the services of propaganda and 
psychological warfare by the Western forces." Vernon Mattage is the 
editor-in-chief of B-92 radio, which carries programs by Radio Free 
Europe. We are not scared. But we are seriously preparing ourselves 
for reporting under abnormal circumstances should air strikes happen 
and should the threats made by the nationalists against us happen. 
They are creating an atmosphere of a lynch mob against the independent 
media. And it wouldn't be just the independent media that would suffer. 
Mattage says the threats by the international community have consolidated 
the grip on power of Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic. Belgrade 
analysts say that whatever modest gains towards democracy and a civic 
society have been made in Serbia over the past few years, they could 
all go up in flames as the first bombs fall and the population rallies 
behind the leader. Reporting for "The World," this is Nenad Shebek 
in Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>