<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981006.2000.2072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The water President Clinton was referring to there is $18 billion, 
which he wants Congress to lend to the fund. Lester Thurow, president 
-- or rather Professor of Economics and Management at MIT, says that 
while the actions Washington takes will have a significant impact 
on the global financial crisis, Tokyo is in even better position to 
call the shots. Somebody the other day said to me if you were made 
czar of America, how would you make it better? And my answer was, 
forget that. Make me czar of Japan. There are lots of things I can 
do to help Americans. If I'm czar of Japan, there isn't much I can 
do if I just run things in the United States. Well, if your isolating 
Japan is the beginning and possibly the kernel of the solution, then 
you must feel that there's maybe more shape to this whole crisis than 
others feel. Why is Japan so important to the whole equation? Well, 
because first of all, it's so large. You know, there was week in late 
August where the Japanese market shed more value in a week than the 
Russian economy generates in a year. Everything else is a sideshow. 
Japan is just about as big as all the developing world combined. Japan 
is the only country that really has the capability of making America 
sick, and the problem with Japan is its strong companies in a weak 
economy. But the problem, of course, is we don't have any leverage 
on the Japanese. Does, does Japan have any control over Japan? Does 
Japan agree with your assessment that they're the ones with their 
hands on the controls, and if so, why aren't they moving the controls? 
Well, what they have to do is very similar to what we did in our savings 
and loan crisis, you know, shut banks down, shut business firms down, 
auction off assets, revalue, throw people in jail who've done criminal 
activity, throw people out of office who are politicians. And in a 
consensus society, how do you do that? The person you're throwing 
in jail is your son-in-law. The person that's going into bankruptcy 
was your college classmate. And in Japan, of course, if you go bankrupt, 
you're expected to commit suicide. Well, yesterday, Professor Thurow, 
we were talking to someone, to a correspondent who was giving us his 
take on the election in Brazil. And it seemed as if, to some extent 
in that country, the voters in Brazil were thinking that the man they 
elected president would be able to do something to protect Brazil 
against this phenomenon. Are you saying they might as well forget 
it? I think that's an illusion. Everybody says my neighborhood's burning 
down. What do I do to save my house? And of course, the answer is 
nothing. If you're in Singapore and your main trading partner, Indonesia, 
is going down minus 25 percent, Malaysia's going down at 8 and Thailand 
at 10 and the Philippines at 12, the answer is you're not going to 
have a positive rate of growth even if you run the perfect economy 
in Singapore. And you know, the basic problem is that we've moved 
from national economy to global economy. We don't have global government. 
And of course, the Congress doesn't want global government. They're 
not willing to give the money to the IMF to do what they have to do. 
Well, wait a second, if you're saying that it's really up to Japan 
to kind of change itself, how does the IMF fit into that? Well, the 
IMF fits into it in terms of giving everybody breathing room to do 
the right things in the Third World. Or if Brazil were to melt down, 
the IMF doesn't have any money to rescue them at the moment. You know, 
I'd gather that President Clinton used this thing -- the fact that 
you think the fire department needs to be reorganized... Mm-hmm. ... 
doesn't mean you shut the water off. And I think the same thing's 
true here. Now, I think the other stupid thing that was done recently 
is Mr. Greenspan's fault. When he lowered interest rates a quarter 
of a point last week, he was basically saying this is not a very important 
event. I think he should have lowered interest rates by a percentage 
point because he is, in fact, the central banker for the world. And 
this is not fine-tuning inflation. This is not stimulating investment. 
This is signaling to the world we know an economic hurricane is building 
up, and we're willing to provide the liquidity to make sure it doesn't 
blow the house down. In a sense, the president may have been raising 
the possibility that one has to look at this in a very fundamental 
way in terms of just the very spirit by which we do business. You 
know, there's a suggested criticism of capitalism itself in that he's 
talking about massive capital flows draining out of countries with 
nobody caring about the people inside. Is compassion an element of 
this? Capitalism is not supposed to care about people. It cares about 
money. The big problem is we've developed this whole set of technologies 
that allow people to move money around the world to create a global 
economy, and we haven't created the institutions to go with them. 
We need to sit down and give the IMF money in the first place but 
then think about what kind of a regulatory financial mechanism do 
we want on a global basis to make sure that this doesn't happen in 
the future? And we aren't willing to do that. If we had this kind 
of a stronger international IMF, at some point in the future, they'll 
be telling America what to do -- not just Brazil or Russia -- and 
we aren't willing to have a stronger IMF. Lester Thurow is a professor 
of economics and management at MIT. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>