<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981006.2000.3000 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Though Democrats on Capitol Hill tried today to craft an alternative 
to the Republican proposal for an open-ended impeachment investigation, 
they seem to understand that they're fighting a losing battle. This 
Thursday, the House is almost certain to vote for only the third presidential 
impeachment investigation in the nation's history. Most Americans, 
we suggest, have already chosen sides on the scandal and its appropriate 
resolution. Some consider the president guilty as charged. They want 
him out. Others consider the whole thing a partisan witch hunt. Well, 
we went in search of a different perspective from a group of outsiders 
who, nevertheless, are closely watching the events in Washington. 
"The World's" Jeb Sharp spoke with foreign students at Tufts University's 
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy. Walk in the door of the Fletcher 
School and the first space you encounter is a big lobby called the 
Hall of Flags, where national symbols hang from the rafters -- a reminder 
that the concerns here are global and many of the students international. 
Off to one side, a class is under way. Eileen Babbitt's course on 
international intervention. Today's topic is a comparative look at 
conflict prevention in Macedonia and Bosnia. So the first question 
for you today is in going back to the issue of Macedonia, before we 
move to Bosnia... All of the international students I spoke with today 
seemed more interested in global problems than domestic politics. 
Fletcher student Imca Vesela of Germany finds the current focus on 
impeachment maddening. I just think right now we really need strong 
American leadership. In the Balkans, the Asian economic crisis, the 
stock exchanges are crushing in South America. Germany just had a 
really bad devaluation of the German share indices. I mean, the Kosovo 
crisis has been going on for a long time. This is -- in that sense, 
it's really a satire that we have one of the most powerful government 
in the world focusing on these issues that seem to be so irrelevant 
to the whole world in a way. Imca Vesela says it's a matter of respect 
in a way, not letting a person be shredded bare in public the way 
Mr. Clinton has been. She points out many national leaders have had 
affairs. In Germany, take, for example, Billy Bond. He had -- it was 
known that he had affairs, but there was sort of -- some sort of honor 
code by the media to adhere to his, you know, to let him live his 
life and not sort of go into this obscene sexual inquiry they're having 
here in the United States. Yannick LeLuanne is from Paris, where he 
studied for an MBA before coming to Fletcher to complete a master's 
degree in international relations. He says he's shocked by the way 
President Clinton has been treated. It's not good for America, for 
the United States to show to the world. It's not a good affair for 
United States, for the economy of the United States for those markets. 
I'm not sure it would be very good for your land. Many foreign students 
here at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy characterize the 
Clinton scandal as a scandal about sexual and private matters. They 
don't see it as high crimes and misdemeanors, nor do they focus much 
on the perjury charges. Their thoughts revolve around the way Mr. 
Clinton has been treated and the high price, as they see it, of diverting 
the attention of the administration and Congress at a critical time. 
Honestly speaking, I'm not comfortable hearing the such prurient and 
shameful incident. I don't want to hear anything more than -- taking 
too much time. It's amazing. Japanese student Toru Miyamoto is studying 
international environmental policy at Fletcher. I think the president 
of the United States have to do much more important work. He don't 
have -- he doesn't have time to waste. So I think you Americans have 
to know, recognize that he, Mr. Clinton, is not only the president 
of the United States, but also the leader of the whole world. Miyamoto 
is dismayed that Congress is contemplating an open-ended impeachment 
inquiry that could distract from important policy questions. And so 
it goes here at Fletcher, where students are worried about Kosovo, 
about the economy, about global climate change. And some of these 
students who once thought they might go into politics when they finished 
their degrees are now worried public life is no longer worth the toll 
-- at least here in the United States. For "The World," I'm Jeb Sharp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>