<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981006.2000.1260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Former national security adviser Anthony Lake is in Eritrea today, 
and on Thursday, he'll be in Ethiopia. He's there as a part of an 
American initiative to help resolve a conflict between the two countries. 
In May, a long-standing border dispute turned violent, and hundreds 
were killed in ground and air attacks. The start of the rainy season 
in June put an end to that round of fighting, but observers say the 
summer lull has allowed both sides to mass reinformants -- reinforcements, 
rather, along the border. The crisis between Ethiopia and Eritrea 
was not altogether expected. For the past seven years, the two neighbors 
have lived in peace. The leaders, in fact, old friends. From Eritrea's 
capital, Asmara, "The World's" Carolyn Dempster reports. The sense 
of betrayal and bitterness is almost tangible in the market cafes 
and on the sidewalks of Eritrea's capital of Asmara. After seven years 
of peace, the talk has turned again to war. Except this time the enemy 
is an old friend. The two grand leaders who run Ethiopia today once 
fought alongside the Eritreans for freedom. Today, the former comrades 
face each other across trenches, along disputed borderlines, waiting 
for a fresh round of hostilities to begin. While, in the cities, popular 
singers appeal to the patriotic instincts of another generation of 
young men and women in the words of a current hit song. "Where are 
you, Eritreans? Your country is waiting. Everybody knows of your bravery," 
goes the song. But this is a conflict which nobody really understands 
and which many say should never have led to war. In spite of the military 
build-up, Eritrea's president, Isaias Afewerki, believes fighting 
is futile. Whichever way, we'll have to have a peaceful solution to 
the problem. We can fight for months. We can fight for years. We can 
fight for days. But that will not get us anywhere. The president has 
bitter experience. He led Eritrean rebels in their 30-year war for 
independence against Ethiopia, and he would much rather pursue the 
route of negotiation. But the peace plan proposed by the United States 
and Rwanda has foundered, and all direct contact between the neighbors 
has ceased. Political analysts point to economic policy differences 
as one possible cause of the squabble. Eritrea recently introduced 
its own currency and a free market policy, making trade more difficult 
between the two countries. Another reason given is Ethiopia's expansionist 
desires and their eagerness to get access to the sea and a deep-water 
port. But the single act which has raised temperatures and tensions 
has been a summary deportation of some 20,000 Eritreans or Ethiopians 
of Eritrean origin from Ethiopia. Professor Asnan Omligesse is a member 
of Citizens for Peace, an association of professional Eritreans which 
was set up to monitor and document the mass expulsions. This is entirely 
new. They simply lock up your home and say, we have taken over. The 
only parallel that one can think of is India. India means expulsion 
of Indians and Pakistanis from Uganda. Asnan says the way the Ethiopian 
government has carried out the expulsions is also likely to foster 
resentment which will last decades. They are being quite indiscriminate. 
They are deporting people, breaking up families, mothers from infants, 
disabled people, clergymen, nuns, priests. Many of them taken away 
not from their homes, but from the early morning service in church. 
It is truly horrific. Gibrim Exculsehiah was brought up in Ethiopia. 
He went to college with Ethiopia's prime minister, Meles Zenawi, and 
used to be on first-name terms with members of Ethiopia's ruling elite. 
He also invested about half a million dollars in a transport business 
in Nazret, his hometown. It didn't help, though. He was among the 
first to be deported because of his Eritrean heritage. We were kicked 
out just like, you know, a trash can, and they didn't allow me to 
put my underwear. Gibrim was arrested and detained by military police 
for two days before being bussed to the border with other deportees. 
He says he feared the worst. We were scared to death, and we thought 
in the city of Umara, which was at one kilometers from the border, 
that they would shoot us. The deportees were dropped at the border 
at dawn and made to cross the military lines on foot. Some still haven't 
fully recovered from the trauma. At a temporary tented refugee camp 
in Dekemhare, Ruma Degash, one of the most recent deportees, is still 
trying to make sense of why she had to leave. I've lived in Ethiopia 
for 19 years. The soldiers didn't tell me it was because I was Eritrean 
that they wanted to deport me, but they told my neighbors this was 
the reason. They put me on the bus, and I refused to go. I said they 
should rather shoot me there and then unless they let me fetch my 
daughter. They allowed me to get her, but they never once gave me 
a reason. They just said, "You are going back to your country." I 
am an asthmatic, and by the time we got the border, I was barely conscious. 
Outside Sumari's Catholic church, which towers over Asmara, hundreds 
of Christians swathed in white pray for peace, chanting, "Jesus, help 
us." Many are veterans of the 30-year war of independence, and they 
know what misery war brings. But both Eritrea and Ethiopia have deployed 
more troops along their common borders and have been busy buying arms 
and ammunition. As the expulsions continue, former friends on both 
sides of the divide are preparing to face each other as foes, when 
the war is expected to start again at the end of the summer rains. 
This is Carolyn Dempster reporting for "The World" from Asmara, Eritrea. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>