<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981006.2000.2718 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We return now to Alaska for the answer to today's geography quiz. 
We were looking for a park shared by Alaska and British Columbia. 
A hundred years ago, this area attracted thousands of gold seekers 
in search of their fortunes. The park is home to the Chilkoot Trail, 
a 33-mile stretch at the start of the route to the Klondike. Well, 
the answer to today's geography quiz is the Klondike Gold Rush International 
Historical Park. Its curator, Debbie Sanders, says that even today 
you can find remnants of the gold rush -- none of them nuggets -- 
all along the Chilkoot Trail. There are all sorts of cans left behind 
of things that they were eating as they were traveling. Also, sometimes 
shoes would wear out... Mm-hmm. ...so they would leave the shoes. 
Mm-hmm. The other big thing is a lot of times they were carrying a 
lot more than they really needed or wanted. And as they proceeded 
up the trail, they would discard things, thinking, "Boy, I really 
don't need this." And the big place for discarding was a place called 
"the scales," which is right before you go up what's known as the 
golden stairs. And there was a tram system here that if people had 
money, they could pay for that. And the rate of transporting goods 
went way up from this point. So there again, people were shuffling 
through their items and thinking, "Maybe I don't need this." What 
kinds of things would they leave at that point? There are stove parts. 
There are shovels. There is pans, pots and pans, coffee pots. This 
is poignant in a way in that these were the last things they dropped 
before they thought they'd probably be able to have all the money 
in the world to buy anything they wanted, right? That's right. I guess 
they figured once they were in the Klondike and were up there with 
all the gold that they would have enough money to buy anything. What 
about personal items, something that might give us an insight into 
what they were thinking or feeling at that point? Well, we don't actually 
find a whole lot on the trail. But what has happened is there's an 
awful lot of relatives around that have people that went over the 
trail, and a lot of them have acquired their relatives diaries, photographs, 
that kind of a thing. And especially because of the centennial this 
year, people are returning a lot of that stuff to us. And I think, 
you know, some of our favorite items are the personal diaries and 
photographs that really do tell the story of what they were thinking 
and feeling. I would bet. Well, what about today? Who's drawn to this 
site and from what kinds of countries? Most of our hikers are from 
Canada and then Alaska, but then we get a lot of Germans these days 
are coming over. We've had quite a few people from France and all 
over Europe and, of course, all over the lower 48. So it still is 
a trail that is used internationally today. Debbie Sanders is the 
curator at the Klondike Gold Rush International Historical Park. Thanks 
a lot. Uh-huh, you're welcome. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>