<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981006.2000.2420 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
in London today, representatives from 25 European and Asian nations 
met to combat the growing problem of the child sex trade. Children's 
Charities say that, in Asia alone, more than 650,000 children under 
the age of 16 worked as prostitutes and that one million children 
enter the global sex market every year. Even United States is having 
a growing problem with the sexual exploitation of children, and "The 
World's" Alan Dow reports. Outside a temple in Pakistan, dancers entertain 
foreign tourists. Nearby, children are competing for the tourists' 
attention. The children are orphans. Their heads are grossly deformed, 
having been deliberately bound for years by the adults they live with. 
The deformity earns them more money because the tourists take pity 
on them. In other countries, like the Philippines and Thailand, the 
commercial exploitation of children is primarily sexual and equally 
appalling. But there are some attempts to prevent the abuse. It's 
a.m. in the red light district of Manila. A Philippine vice squad 
raids a brothel full of girls under the age of 15. One describes her 
night's work. The customer pays $10 for 15 minutes with me. I get 
less than half that. The rest goes to the pimps. I was with a client 
when the police came in tonight. I don't like the work. I think it's 
a sad place. Manila's red light district has attracted men from around 
the world for some time. But in recent years, organized sex tours 
have begun catering to European and North American pedophiles. Today, 
in London, delegates from the European Union and several Asian countries 
discussed the issue. We are here talking about a global problem. We 
are talking about millions of child prostitutes worldwide. Britain's 
justice minister, Derrick Fachet, says the problem is not confined 
to Asia. The United States government says that there are 300,000 
children working as prostitutes on the streets of U.S. cities and 
that in Moscow, children as young as the age of 8 sell themselves 
for food, cigarettes or a miniature of vodka. And we also know here 
in the United Kingdom, to our own revulsion, the children are traded 
for sex in this country, too. Britain recently introduced a law making 
it illegal to have sex with children not only in Britain, but anywhere 
in the world. But critics say it will be difficult to enforce when 
the illegal act happens in a foreign land with foreign customs and 
foreign victims. Children are forced to work in order to survive, 
to have their families. Edwin Baroung, a young Filipino who's attending 
the London conference, has seen firsthand how easily young boys and 
girls in Manila are drawn to the sex trade. One of my friends, he 
belongs in a big family, and he ran away from home. He met some of 
the children in the parks. He's asking that why are you have lot of 
monies and lot of stuff. And the kids say that we have friend, we 
have a foreign friend and they say just go with us. They stay in a 
five-star hotel, and we can go there and you'll meet him. They go 
to the mall, and this foreigner bought them a lot of clothes, toys. 
Then they go back to hotels and they do something sexual, ask the 
kids to pose or take some videos. Many groups are working to end child 
prostitution. But volunteers say they're frustrated with the attitude 
of many Western governments. Two years ago, 122 countries, including 
the United States, agreed to develop national strategies to deal with 
child prostitution. But Christine Bedow of the group End Child Prostitution, 
says so far, the Clinton administration hasn't released its plan. 
The U.S. is also one of only two countries that has not yet ratified 
the convention on the right's of the child. Every other country, except 
the United States, has shown their commitment in other ways as well. 
So we're really urging the United States to really work hard and catch 
up with the rest of the world. The delay in Washington's ratification 
is due to political wrangling over the document's wording and some 
congressional objections to certain clauses like the minimum age at 
which young men and women can be drafted. Human rights campaigners 
say the commercial and sexual exploitation of children will always 
be a problem wherever there's poverty. And they fear the downturn 
in the world's economy will only make matters worse. Instead of going 
to school and enjoying what should be the most carefree days of their 
lives, many children could end up on the streets supplying a service 
to those willing to pay for it. For "The World," I'm Alan Dow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>