<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981006.2000.0666 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Kosovo, ethnic Albanian leaders have been encouraging NATO strikes, 
but as has been the case since the crackdown began seven months ago, 
the ethnic Albanians do not speak with a strong unified voice. Their 
elected leaders, chief among them Ibrahim Rugova, lost their power 
nine years ago when Milosevic stripped Kosovo of its autonomy. Bujar 
Bokoshi is Rugova's prime minister in Kosovo's shadow government. 
He's in Washington this week, meeting with U.S. policy makers about 
the crisis. Dr. Bokoshi, what message have you brought to Washington, 
and what has Washington been saying to you? We are trying always to 
urge U.S. policy to finally act by using force to stop Serbian activities 
and certain genocidal acts against the Albanian in Kosovo. And what 
is your assurance that they not only agree with you, but will take 
that kind of action? I could say that I am pleased that the United 
States has finally accepted that the only way to stop Milosevic and 
this slaughter of Kosovo Albanians, our civilians, is to force or 
go through a credible threat of force. Should NATO, with the support 
of the United States, take the actions that your government has been 
recommending, what will happen next? Certainly, the problem won't 
be over at that point. Who will then speak for Kosovo? Kosovo has 
a leadership, a responsible leadership who shows -- showed through 
all this long years the readiness of cooperativity, constructivity, 
and we could answer in any -- we are ready to cooperate with all international 
bodies respecting all guidelines. If NATO does take military action, 
if your government can cooperate with the KLA, what will your demands 
be? What will you insist upon in any negotiations that follow? First 
of all, we always insisted to find a political solution without confrontation, 
without conflict. And now, we are still searching for such solution. 
Our position is that the Albanian people in Kosovo has the right to 
self-determination. And we have to be in the situation to decide about 
our own political future. This is all what we want. Now, when you 
say "self-determination," you mean independence. You mean a Kosovo 
apart, really, from any kind of control by Serbia. This is not something 
the West has said it itself would back. Yes, we are aware about the 
effort of the international community, so-called autonomy under Serbia. 
But it's -- it doesn't work, and it will never work if the Albanians 
remain under Serbian brutal rule, brutal regime because we have very 
bad experiences with all the Serbia regimes. Dr. Bokoshi, if you get 
to negotiations, if the representatives of President Milosevic or 
President Milosevic himself says, OK, we can make a deal. And if the 
West says, yes, we can make a deal, but what you must give up is any 
thought of an independent Kosovo, would you be willing ultimately, 
if necessary, to accept that? We would accept transitional, so-called 
interim status or position, interim agreement. And of course, this 
status, this transitory status should have a substance, not paper 
-- paper of Milosevic which never will be respected. And we are -- 
we are ready to talk, and the starting point the right of the Albanians 
to self-determination, not by using a force or confrontation or war. 
Dr. Bokoshi, thank you very much for speaking with us. Thank you very 
much. Bujar Bokoshi is prime minister in Kosovo's shadow government. 
He spoke to us from Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>