<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1700.2276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As for the IMF's annual meeting, which opened on Monday, VOA's Economic 
Corespondent Barry Wood reports that this one is more important than 
most. This meeting comes at a time of unprecedented global financial 
turmoil. Fifteen months after it began, the crisis that erupted with 
Thailand's devaluation has not yet been contained. What seemed initially 
like a regional financial crisis has turned into Asia's deepest depression 
since the 1930's. As Asia slid into depression, demand for industrial 
raw materials fell sharply. David Hale, of the Zurich Group, says 
collapsing oil prices in August forced Russia not just to devalue, 
but default on its foreign debt. That move, says Mr. Hale, triggered 
a withdrawal of capital from Eastern Europe and Latin America. And 
sent stock prices worldwide tumbling. And this has given us in the 
last five weeks, the most extraordinary example of not just regional, 
but global financial contagion we've seen since the early 1930's. 
Because Russia was $20 billion short of what it needed to maintain 
the confidence of the markets this summer, we've taken three trillion 
dollars off global stock market capitalization. It has set in motion, 
what will be by the end of this year, quite a significant global credit 
crunch. Producing a recession in two thirds of the world economy next 
year. For the past year, the IMF has spearheaded the global response 
to the financial crisis. It has lent billions to Thailand, Indonesia, 
South Korea, and Russia. Now, with the IMF itself running short of 
money, various proposals for streamlining the lending agency are on 
the table. U.S. Treasury Secretary, Robert Rubin agrees that the IMF 
should play an enhanced role in crisis prevention. But he wants the 
IMF to be more open and accountable to its members. Founded in 1944, 
the IMF operates under a weighted voting system. Which gives nearly 
half of all votes to Western industrial countries. Despite this, the 
IMF is not popular in the U.S. Congress. Which has been slow to approve 
new U.S. contributions to the Washington based lending agency. Experts 
agree that far-reaching changes or a new financial architecture will 
not be in place for several years. But important discussions on changing 
the IMF and the financial system are now underway. The changes are 
likely to begin with more modest initiatives. Like approval of a new 
credit line within the IMF for countries worried about, but not yet 
affected by financial turmoil. VOA economics correspondent, Barry 
Wood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>