<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1700.3158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Paternity testing based on DNA evidence has become more common across 
the United States over the past decade. And DNA testing companies 
have proliferated and say about a third of their tests prove the man 
in question is not the child's father. Several such companies have 
started to advertise their services. And have found that billboards 
are the best way to reach potential clients. Critics of the practice 
say that such mass marketing raises some disturbing moral questions. 
Frank Morris reports from Kansas City. Driving east out of downtown 
Kansas City on I-70, a large brightly lettered billboard asks: "Who's 
the father?" and tells drivers to call 1-800-DNA-TYPE. A man named 
Daniel recently used the service to clear up questions about the genealogy 
of a boy he calls his son. Doubts raised by circumstances surrounding 
the child's conception several years ago. The young lady that I am 
now married to was having a lot of problems in her marriage. And I 
was a traveling musician, and took advantage of whatever situations 
came along, if you know what I mean? Daniel thought he had, indeed, 
conceived the child with his future wife. But the baby was born while 
she was still married to her first husband. The other man claimed 
the boy as well. But Daniel wanted the child to carry his family name. 
The easiest way to change the name was to establish paternity. Last 
week, Daniel and his wife found out their DNA test results. Hey, momma's 
been telling us the truth all along. You know, you really are my son. 
It's one of those kind of things. Technicians determined Daniel's 
relationship to his son, using only a few cells from saliva. Along 
with some from his wife and a sample from the boy. The swabs were 
dried and sent to a lab where chemists examined the DNA. The whole 
process took a week and cost Daniel $600. About 75 companies now offer 
DNA paternity tests. One called Identigene has been riding the tide 
of expansion in the industry. And three years ago, became the first 
to advertise on billboards. Identigene founder Caroline Kasky says 
ever since then, the company's business has increased by about 200 
percent per year. We're doing well. We're pleased to say that people 
do respond. And this is something that is in demand. I think people 
are realizing more and more, they have a right to the truth. And the 
truth is not a bad thing at all. Kasky says paternity tests come in 
handy in cases where people are trying to claim inheritance, adopt 
children, establish a bloodline, or even avoid paying child support. 
Carl Furbster is a pastor for a Fundamentalist Christian church in 
suburban Kansas City. He says he doesn't mind these tests being available. 
But, he's saddened to see them being marketed to such a wide audience. 
When you advertise on a billboard, you're going to the general public. 
What you're saying is: General public, we have a service that you 
can use. And what we see these signs telling us, is that we have a 
morally sick society. Furbster says the signs tell him that more and 
more people are engaging in what he considers, immoral behavior. But 
he says Identigene's billboards themselves are not objectionable. 
Having nude pictures up on signs, having girlie shows advertised on 
signs. All these kind of things that we have fought in this city before. 
Those are the kinds of things that put thoughts into people's minds 
about immoral behavior. These signs actually can cause people to think 
about: Hmm, this immoral behavior is taking place, and somebody's 
making a buck off of it. Others too, have criticized Identigene's 
"Who's the father?" billboard campaign. Saying it can spread suspicion 
among otherwise contented dads. But family law attorney David Chamberlain 
says, in his experience, couples interested in paternity tests are 
almost always headed for divorce, anyway. I don't deal with the people 
who are happily married, driving down the road, see a billboard, and 
say: what the heck? Let's spend $600 just to confirm I'm daddy. You 
know, I imagine if guys say that, then I probably would be dealing 
with them the next week. While circumstances leading to a paternity 
test are often traumatic, Idenigene expects the market for such tests 
to keep growing. The company plans to expand its "Who's the Father?" 
billboard campaign to five additional cities by the end of this year. 
I'm Frank Morris, in Kansas City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>