<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1800.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the threat of NATO air strikes hanging over Yugoslavia because 
of the country's actions in Kosovo, residents of Belgrade are expressing 
VOA correspondent Art Chimes has been sampling opinion on the streets 
of the Yugoslav capital. People out on the streets of Belgrade are 
normally eager to share their opinions, but not today. Most people 
we asked on this beautiful, warm, autumn day were unwilling to speak 
and one even said he thought it was forbidden to talk to Western radio 
stations like VOA. Some are willing to speak, however. A telephone 
repairman named Zelica Taret says that, like any other normal person, 
he is worried about the possibility of an attack, but he says the 
United Nations is unfairly singling out Yugoslavia. If the British 
did for 40 years what they did in Northern Ireland, why can't Serbia 
do the same thing in Kosovo, he says. And if air strikes are followed 
up with ground troops as some experts say would be needed, he would 
consider them to be an occupying enemy to be fought in any way possible. 
Another pedestrian, a 25 year old Bosnian Serb refugee, says he thinks 
Yugoslavia has only partly complied with the United Nations demand 
for a withdrawal from forces from Kosovo but said any decision to 
punish Belgrade would be made, not by any international body but by 
Washington alone. I heard that Russia will veto any action in the 
Security Council he says, but American will go ahead anyway if they 
want to. He went onto say he hopes that if there is an attack, it 
will be limited to military targets. Meanwhile, diplomatic efforts 
continue to try to head off the possibility of military action. The 
head of the New York based Institute for Transition to Democracy, 
Bogdon Dennish says the Western allies are up against a clever politician 
in Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic. I think that this is --- 
as being -- smart in figuring out when the West is bluffing. I think 
basically Milosevic has said, look, I want to see what you guys are 
ready to put up. He has backed down a little but not enough. I mean, 
the fact is I -- Albania will accept no settlement that could be -- 
by Belgrade by tomorrow morning. There has to be international guarantees. 
International guarantees cannot exist unless there's a military presence 
or a police presence in Kosovo. Back outside, a pensioner sitting 
on a bench along Belgrade's main pedestrian street says the world 
doesn't understand Serbia. We're a small country she says and a thorn 
in everyone's eye. We never attack anyone. We only defend ourselves 
she says, and that's why everyone hates us. A small country, she repeats, 
but strong. The woman and her friends say they hope for and expect 
a diplomatic solution. I asked them for their occupation. Patriots, 
they say, who love this country and wouldn't give it up for anything 
in the world. Art Chimes, VOA News, Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>