<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1700.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. Special Envoy, Richard Hallbrook is continuing his efforts to 
broker a cease fire in Serbia's Kosovo province. Philip Smucker reports 
Mr. Hallbrook met with Kosovo officials Tuesday in Prisina then flew 
back to Belgrade for more discussions with Serb leaders. The U.S. 
Special Envoy is holding the threat of possible NATO air strikes over 
the head of the Serbian government. But, he also is examining options 
of beefing up the Western presence in Kosovo, and monitoring a cease 
fire between Serbs and Albanians. US officials said Mr. Hallbrook 
asked American and European observers in Kosovo, Tuesday, How many 
men would be needed to monitor a cease fire in Kosovo? A U.S. plan 
already exists to expand the current Western monitoring mission, based 
mainly in Prisina , to cover all of Kosovo. The larger Western presence 
to monitor a cease fire and end the violence in Kosovo is one alternative 
to direct Western military intervention. Western observers fear that 
NATO bombing meant to punish the Serbian government for its brutal 
tactics again ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, could backfire and lead 
to revenge killings of refugees by Serbian paramilitary units. U.S. 
and European observers in Kosovo had been instrumental in uncovering 
several atrocities allegedly carried out by Serbian security forces. 
The atrocities have sparked international condemnation of the Serbian 
regime and the threat of NATO air strikes. One Western diplomat cautioned 
that while the Westerners could act as a shield for ethnic Albanians, 
it could also be taken hostage if and when NATO decides to intervene. 
Mr. Hallbrook said earlier, that Yugoslav President Slobodan Molosovich 
remained uncompromising in his approach to the Kosovo crisis. Ethnic 
Albanian leader Ebreham Rugovah told Mr. Hallbrook in a meeting that 
Albanians favor a NATO mission in Kosovo to stop the Serb military 
and keep the peace. Mr. Rugovah and Mr. Hallbrook are close friends, 
and the Ethnic Albanian leader has strong backing in Washington for 
his non-violent approach to peacemaking. But the Albanian leader has 
no control over guerrilla fighters in the Kosovo Liberation Army or 
KLA. A fresh communique from the KLA's general staff says that the 
time has passed for a peaceful solution to the Kosovo question. And 
that the time has come for a military and political solution. Philip 
Smucker for VOA NEWS, Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>