<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1800.0815 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The House Judiciary Committee voted late Monday to launch an impeachment 
inquiry of President Clinton and the White House has denounced the 
process as neither fair nor bipartisan. The Congress has started impeachment 
proceedings against a U.S. president only twice before in U.S. history. 
In 1974, the House Judiciary Committee held hearings and approved 
three articles of impeachment against President Richard Nixon for 
the Watergate scandal. The committee charged Mr. Nixon with taking 
part in a criminal conspiracy to obstruct justice in the cover up 
of the break in at the Democratic Party's headquarters in the Watergate 
building complex. Mr. Nixon was also accused of a series of abuses 
of power. Mr. Nixon resigned before the full House could vote on the 
articles of impeachment. In 1868, the full House of Representatives 
approved articles of impeachment against President Andrew Johnson. 
Tensions were still high in the wake of the American Civil War and 
members of Congress were angered by President Johnson's dismissal 
of his War Secretary, Edwin Stanton. They charged the president with 
conspiring against Congress and the Constitution. Mr. Johnson was 
acquitted, however, in a Senate trial by one vote and he was not impeached 
in the end. One hundred thirty years later, White House aides are 
criticizing Monday's Congressional impeachment move against President 
Clinton as unfair and politically motivated. But they say Mr. Clinton 
is not preoccupied with the House proceedings. David Gullest reports 
from the White House. White House spokesman Joe Lockhart says Mr. 
Clinton had better things to do than to watch the televised House 
Judiciary Committee hearings Monday that produced a vote to recommend 
a formal impeachment inquiry. He told reporters it would be impossible 
for the president to ignore the events in Congress entirely but that 
Mr. Clinton continues to devote most of his attention to pressing 
domestic and foreign policy issues. The president is focusing on the 
job that he was sent here to do and that's the proper thing to do, 
whether it's international economics, Kosovo or the various appropriation 
bills where we're trying to make sure his priorities -- I think that 
is what the public wants him to focus on and that's what he's going 
to remain focused on. Mr. Lockhart cast the party line committee vote 
as part of what he said was a preconceived Republican strategy to 
embarrass the president in advance of the November elections. The 
committee proceedings he said were neither fair nor bipartisan and 
said the American people have a right to be disappointed. But he acknowledged 
that the full House is all but certain to follow it up later this 
week with a vote to begin what will only be the third presidential 
impeachment investigation in the nation's history. We can always remain 
hopeful. But as I said earlier, there's a certain sense that the die 
is cast on this issue but, you know, there is time between now and 
then and, you know, there's no point in giving out hope. Clinton aides 
are insisting in both public comments and in calls to members of Congress 
that the president's affair with former intern Monica Lewinsky and 
efforts to conceal it do not approach the level of an impeachable 
offense. However, the Republican investigator for the Judiciary Committee, 
David Chippers, says evidence suggests 15 substantial incredible grounds 
for impeachment action, including lying under oath by Mr. Clinton, 
obstructing justice and conspiracy. David Gullest, VOA News, the White 
House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>