<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1700.0791 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Also looking for equity and fairness, but not finding it, are family 
members of people killed in the U.S. Embassy bombing in Kenya. They're 
getting money from the country's National Disaster Emergency Fund. 
But, VOA's Sonya Lawrence Green finds most families are saying no 
amount can compensate for their losses. Kenya's government has pitched 
a large army tent in one corner of Ahuru Park in downtown Nairobi. 
Where officials with the National Disaster Emergency Fund are dispersing 
checks to relatives of those killed in the bombing two months ago. 
Outside the tent, subdued family members mill about near billboards 
that carry the names of victims handwritten on yellowing paper. Inside 
the tent, people line up to present their documents, then wait to 
collect the checks worth about $1600. Richard Karimi is a volunteer 
official with the disaster fund who is sorting through the paperwork. 
The processes take too long. We have to identify the beneficiaries, 
the correct beneficiaries. Not only with the petitions from the. Donations 
to the fund total nearly $4 million. And Mr. Karimi says all the money 
will go directly to the family members who lost someone in the bombing. 
He expects all the money to be dispersed within the next three months. 
Theresa Juanjuru, 28 years old, lost her husband, an accountant, in 
the bombing. She is left with two small children. And says the loss 
of her husband is devastating. Now, somehow grateful they are helping 
us. Mrs. Juanjuru said she is grateful for the money from the Disaster 
Fund. But says it will not last long. Most of it will disappear into 
rent, food, school fees, and other expenses which her husband's salary 
used to cover. And then, she must somehow find a job. Henry Unyango 
lost his younger brother in the bombing. He said his whole family 
relied on the income from his brother's job as a technician with the 
power company. It will be very difficult for us. I mean, who was actually 
the sole bread-winner of our family. In Africa, often one employed 
person supports a whole network of family members. As Mr. Unyango's 
brother did. He was the one educating my younger brother. And maybe 
two kids, the second one left is only three weeks old. There have 
been other local fund raisers to assist victims of the bombing. And 
in the United States, President Bill Clinton has asked Congress for 
50 million dollars to help Kenya and Tanzania with the aftermath of 
the twin bomb explosions at American embassies in those two countries. 
But over two hundred sixty people were killed. And more than five 
thousand others injured in the terrorist attack. Most families effected 
say that there is no amount of money which can compensate them for 
their losses. Sonya Lawrence Green, for VOA NEWS, Nairobi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>