<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1800.2123 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While Russia's foreign minister was talking about Kosovo, the new 
Prime Minister, Yfgeni Primikov was talking about potential trouble 
much closer to home. As many as 40 million Russians may answer the 
call of the communist party and labor unions for nationwide protests 
Wednesday against the government's failure to pay its bills. Mr. Primikov 
went on radio and television to urge Russians not to rock the boat, 
as he put it, saying the sea is too stormy. He pledged that back wages 
will be paid the military, teachers and other government workers and 
said a plan is being formed to pull Russia out of its economic crisis, 
but it will need international help to succeed. Former General Alexander 
Lebbid a one time national security chief to President Boris Yeltsin 
has called on Mr. Yeltsin to resign, a theme that VOA's Peter Heimlein 
says was to have played a big part in Wednesday's demonstrations but 
may not. Communist and trade union groups have been staging rallies 
around Moscow for the past week as a buildup to the October 7th protests. 
Organizers had earlier expressed hope that a massive turnout might 
spark sustained protests and force President Boris Yeltsin to resign. 
But in the weeks leading up to these nationwide demonstrations, something 
has happened. The Kremlin, fearing the biggest protests in years, 
has quietly shifted away from confrontation. President Yeltsin, who 
enjoys being a vocal and highly public leader, has all but disappeared 
from public view. After firing the unpopular reformist prime minister 
Sergei Keryinka in August, Mr. Yeltsin has turned over the government 
to the old line communist era bureaucrat, Ygvini Primikof. Mr. Primikof 
has put together a cabinet with no firm ideology, and as yet, no clear 
direction. But he to make paying wages and pensions his first priority. 
So as demonstrators prepare for a day of strikes and rallies, the 
targets of their anger seem to have vanished. On the eve of the day 
of protests, a survey of people on the streets revealed a casual indifference. 
Sixty-four year old retiree, Anatoli Yvanof smiles at the at the baby 
with him and said, "If my grandson allows me, I will go to the demonstration." 
He, like most others, expresses dissatisfaction with President Yeltsin, 
but says the Primikof government deserves a chance. He says, "The 
new government just began work. I trust Primikof ". Over the past 
few years it has been the elderly who have consistently turned out 
for anti-government and anti-Yeltsin protests. Wednesday is expected 
to be no different. But 72 year old Victor Musienka, a communist party 
member for 50 years says this time he will stay home. He says, "I 
don't support this protest. I think it is senseless." Thirty-nine 
year old Yvgini Pretkin is a teacher from a small village about 250 
kilometers south of Moscow. He says, most rural Russians have little 
hope or faith in the power of protest. He says, "I know the quiet 
indignation of the regions." Then adds, "Moscow is not Russia." Mr. 
Pretkin predicts the demonstrations, no matter how big, will fail 
to rouse the public because, as he explains, "Patience is Russia's 
national trait." A nationwide survey last week supported Mr. Pretkin's 
view. It showed that while nearly half the people questioned supported 
the idea of anti-Yeltsin protests, barely one in ten was likely to 
participate. Yuri Levada, the highly regarded pollster who conducted 
the survey was quoted as saying, "Nobody is interested in any sort 
of struggle." Peter Heimlein, VOA News, Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>