<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1700.2928 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was more bad economic news from Japan. As the government, Tuesday, 
forecast the world's second largest economy will remain in a deep 
recession for the rest of the year. VOA correspondent, Chris Simpkins 
reports from the VOA Asian News Center. If the predictions hold true, 
Japan's economy will shrink for a second straight year. The government 
says Japan's economy will shrink by 1.8 percent this fiscal year. 
With one of the world's largest and most powerful economies already 
in its worst recession in half a century, the Economic Planning Agency 
revised downward earlier predictions of 1.9 percent growth through 
March of 1999. The EPA says the country's gross domestic product is 
unlikely to grow anytime in the near future. Citing little demand 
for new goods and services. The agency also grimly predicted a 10 
percent decline of investment of businesses in new factories and equipment. 
The sharpest drop in five years. The Agency says the slowdown in spending 
threatens to push the economy into a deflationary spiral. Something 
not seen in Japan since the 1930's, when massive drops in wages and 
prices sent the country into an economic crisis. The report comes 
as Japanese lawmakers continue debate over how much money should be 
spent to clean up the country's banking system. Japanese Prime Minister 
Kaso Obuchi has also called on his cabinet to formulate new measures 
to revive the economy. Which may include more tax cuts and public 
spending programs. Published reports in Japan say the new stimulus 
package expected to be unveiled next month, could total $220 billion. 
It would supplement the $126 billion stimulus package Tokyo unveiled 
last April. Senior Economist Brian Rose of the investment firm Warberg, 
Dylan, and Reed in Tokyo, says a new economic stimulus package is 
unlikely to help Japan's economy in the long run. Assuming they can 
come up with the money. It will be, provide, quite a boost short term 
to the economy. The problem though is, just like all the other the 
stimulus packages, it doesn't address the underlying structural problems. 
It only sort of masks them. And that's why no matter how many of these 
things the government provides, the economy can't recover. Mr. Rose 
says, besides problems to Japan's banking system, the government is 
yet to address the large number of bad investments that continue to 
be made. The Economic Planning Agency also predicts Japan's shrinking 
economy will cause many more bankruptcies and corporate downsizing. 
Driving the nation's unemployment rate even higher this year. The 
only positive news in the latest economic report was on exports. The 
government says demand for Japanese products overseas is expected 
to rise. But only a meager six/tenths of one percent this year. Chris 
Simpkins, from the VOA Asian News Center. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>