<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1700.1393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The recent International Festival of Puppetry brought puppet companies 
from 16 nations to New York. VOA's Martin Bush reports on one of the 
festival's most acclaimed productions. Kai Don a puppet show for adults, 
was produced at the festival by the American stage director, choreographer, 
and video artist, Ping Chung. For this new production, Mr. Chung adapted 
three ancient Japanese ghost stories. These are traditional tales 
as familiar to Japanese readers as the fairy tale Pinocchio is to 
Westerners. They express human longing, as supernatural tales often 
do. Especially ghost stories. In the context of the modern world, 
I wanted to bring a little innocence into a cynical world. The main 
character in the first Kai Don story, is an itinerant monk, who encounters 
a mysterious presence in the village, where he is forced to spend 
the night. Excuse me, I am very sorry to be disturbing you, sir. But 
I have lost my way in the mountains, and wonder if I could shelter 
with you for the night. No. Laughter No, I have never taken in much 
as. But in the valley Bartholomew, you will find a certain and fruit 
kill your taint. There you will find rest. The hero of story two, 
is a blind orphan boy who lives in a temple. Because he plays a Japanese 
instrument called the Beewa so beautifully, that he is summoned by 
an aristocrat to serenade a lord. The lord, says Ping Chung, is dead. 
The third story is about a young woman. young man and dies very young. 
And promises that in their lifetime, she shall return in this world. 
Once, puppet shows were meant only for children. No longer. In recent 
years, many adult theatergoers have been attracted to this age-old 
theatrical art. Director Ping Chung credits much of this heightened 
interest to the late Jim Henson, creator of television's "The Muppets." 
To promote stimulating puppet theater, Mr. Henson founded the International 
Festival of Puppetry, here in New York, in 1992. This year, 16 nations 
sent puppet companies to the two week event. Among them, Columbia, 
South Africa, The Netherlands, Indonesia, Israel, and Ghana. Ping 
Chung, the 52 year old director of Kai Don, comes from a noted Chinese 
theatrical family. His father and grandfather directed Chinese opera 
in Guan Jo. His mother sang roles in them. Mr. Chung feels that skillful 
puppeteers endow their theatrical dolls of wood and paint with a mysterious, 
spiritual quality. They are literally breathing life into the puppet. 
Because it is their direct connection with the handling of the puppets 
that gives the puppet its life. So, they are giving up themselves 
into the puppet. And when they do it successfully, then the puppet 
itself comes to life. And I think it's that magical quality, that 
indefinable quality, of that transference of breath and life to an 
inanimate object that is the charm and the seduction of puppetry, 
I think for an audience. The New York Times says the inventiveness 
of the storytelling in Ping Chung's Kai Don, along with the extravagant 
art and artfulness of its set. And the unfailing precision of four 
puppeteers manipulating scores of elaborately contrived and painted 
figures bring cheering audiences to their feet. This is Martin Bush, 
VOA NEWS, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>