<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1800.1828 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke has met with ethnic Albanian leaders 
in Kosovo and come away wondering aloud what it would take to monitor 
a cease fire between the Serbs and Albanians in the province. There 
is a small diplomatic monitoring team in Pristinov but it cannot cover 
all of Kosovo and in any event, there is not yet any cease fire to 
monitor. President Clinton says he's very concerned about Kosovo. 
VOA's David Gullest reports that could explode, spreading violence 
throughout the Balkans. Mr. Clinton conferred on telephone on the 
deepening crisis with British Prime Minister Tony Blair, and he began 
a Washington address to the World Bank and International Monetary 
Fund with a direct warning to Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic 
that time is running out for action by Belgrade that can avert NATO 
military action. As we meet here, my special envoy, Dick Holbrooke, 
is meeting with President Milosevic to reiterate what he must do and 
to make clear that NATO is prepared to act if President Milosevic 
fails to honor the United Nations resolutions. The stakes are high. 
The time is now to end the violence in Kosovo. I hope all of you will 
do whatever you can to that end. Mr. Clinton said NATO leaders agree 
that Kosovo is a powder keg that could spill over and threaten the 
peace and stability of Bosnia, Albania, Macedonia and other countries 
in the region. He said that with a quarter-million Kosovo Albanians 
displaced by fighting and some 50,000 homeless as winter approaches, 
what is already a humanitarian crisis can become a catastrophe. He 
placed most of the blame on the Yugoslav leader. President Milosevic 
is primarily responsible for this crisis. The United Nations has made 
clear the steps we must take to end it. Declare an immediate cease 
fire, withdraw Serb security forces, give humanitarian relief groups 
full and immediate access to Kosovo, begin real negotiations with 
the Kosovar Albanians to find a peaceful and permanent solution to 
their rightful demand for autonomy. U.S. envoy Holbrooke has also 
met in Kosovo with ethnic Albanian political leaders who have refused 
to negotiate with Mr. Milosevic until he ends his seven month long 
crackdown on separatists in the majority Albanian Yugoslav Province. 
Mr. Milosevic has called threats of NATO strikes against Yugoslavia 
criminal. David Gullest, VOA News, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>