<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1800.1346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yesterday, A. Scott Berg, author the biography "Lindbergh" told us 
that Charles Lindbergh, the first person to fly nonstop between New 
York and Paris back in 1927 was the world's first media made celebrity. 
Mr. Berg says that while the historic flight may have made the aviator 
famous, in later years, Lindbergh was scorned. The author tells us 
more in this second part of a conversation with VOA's Dan Noble. Mr. 
Berg, the year 1927 and Lindbergh's flight across the Atlantic, that 
solo flight, made him a hero, an American hero. But shortly before 
World War II he was a member of America First, a group that wanted 
to keep the United States out of the war and once the war began and 
the movement ended, some of the leaders of America First joined the 
armed forces. Why was Lindbergh kept out? Well, Lindbergh desperately 
wanted to join the armed forces. During the great debate that you 
refer to about American intervention or not, Franklin Roosevelt was 
eager for this country to get into the war and Charles Lindbergh was 
the leading spokesman to keep us out of the war. And indeed, they 
engaged in a series of, well really debates over a year or two, between 
1940 and '41. And at one point, when Roosevelt felt he was losing 
that debate, he really went after Charles Lindbergh quite personally. 
He really suggested that he was a defeatist and a traitor, in fact. 
Upon hearing that, Charles Lindbergh who was a colonel in the Army 
Reserve, figured he had to tender his resignation. He said, "How can 
I possibly serve under a commander in chief who thinks I am a traitor?" 
Now, once Pearl Harbor happened, we were bombed and America went into 
the war. Charles Lindbergh desperately wanted to serve but Franklin 
Roosevelt single handedly kept him out. Then Charles Lindbergh tried 
to serve in a civilian capacity, went to every aircraft company, but 
the next day, each of those companies would get a message from the 
government saying, "If you hire Charles Lindbergh, you will get no 
government contracts." So in -- One of the criticisms of Charles Lindbergh, 
and you point this out in your book, was that he was a anti-Semitic. 
He was said to anti-Semitic. Is this what you found in looking over 
the records? Well, it's a tricky issue, anti-Semitism, and I come 
down on two sides on it. If one's definition of an anti-Semite is 
somebody who hates Jews, as many Jewish people have suggested to me, 
then no, Charles Lindbergh was not anti-Semitic. Going through all 
his papers, talking to hundreds of people who knew him, I did not 
come across a trace of bigotry. He really did not hate Jews. On the 
other hand, if being an anti-Semite is someone who sees Jews as different, 
as other, as a separate class from Americans, as Charles Lindbergh 
did, then yes, he is an anti-Semite and he made several statements 
about the Jews. He bought into that mantra that the Jews controlled 
the media, the Jews controlled the government and so forth. He uttered 
that phrase, in fact. That got him into a lot of trouble as it should 
have. So yes, in that regard, again, he was anti-Semitic, His 1948 
book of flight and life restored his reputation somewhat and it was 
an excellently written book and here's a man who did not do well academically. 
He'd left school after two years because of poor grades. How did he 
develop into such a fine write? You have hit upon, to me, one of the 
most interesting things about Charles Lindbergh. He was a dazzlingly 
good writer. I think a lot of it had to do with his wife, not that 
she rewrote anything, but she was a very good editor, besides being 
a great writer herself. Anne Morrow Lindbergh edited all of her husband's 
works. I think she gave him a sense of how to be literary, of how 
to really sit down and begin to phrase your words and so forth. But 
I think the second thing is within Lindbergh himself and that is this 
-- it was a little like flying an airplane. It involved great clarity, 
great mental acuity. Lindbergh always had a very clear head and he 
spoke very clearly. And the one gift Anne Lindbergh gave her husband 
was -- she said, "When you sit down to write, don't try to be literary. 
Just write the way you talk." And she said, "Charles, you speak in 
perfect sentences, perfect paragraphs. That's what you should commit 
to paper." And he did. And he wrote a half dozen books, each better 
than the last. And, "The Spirit of St. Louis", which was written now 
-- well, almost 50 years ago, 45 years ago, still holds up as a magnificent 
adventure story and won the Pulitzer Prize. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Berg. We've been speaking with A. Scott Berg, author of "Lindbergh." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>