<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1700.0623 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton, in the meantime, has some other concerns. The House 
of Representatives faces a historic vote this week on whether to begin 
impeachment hearings against Mr. Clinton. The Judiciary Committee, 
late Monday, approved recommendation for opening hearings in a vote 
which followed party lines. However, as Capitol Hill correspondent, 
Paula Wolfson tells us, there are likely to be a few Democratic party 
defectors when the matter reaches the full House. The first hearing 
in the impeachment process may not be a hearing at all. But, more 
like a college seminar. Angry Democrats have been calling on the Judiciary 
Committee to come up with a firm definition of the term "impeachable 
offense" at the start of the process. Republicans say they'll go part 
way. Florida Congressman Charles Kennedy says his subcommittee on 
the constitution will conduct a review of pertinent law and history 
on October 22. We're going to hear from people expressing a variety 
of viewpoints. Some of them might back up my views. I expect that 
some of them would not back up my views. There will be a divergence 
of opinion there. Mr. Kennedy leaves no doubt. His views are firm. 
Perjury by the president of the United States, and obstruction of 
justice by the president of the United States is a violation of the 
president's oath of office. And a violation of his duty to take care 
that the laws be faithfully executed. Such sharp expressions of opinion 
mark the Judiciary Committee's deliberations Monday on their recommendation 
to the full House. Panel Democrats, some of the most liberal members 
of the legislature, said the President's acts amount to personal failings 
and do not warrant impeachment. But Democrats in the full House tend 
to be more conservative. And Republicans are hoping to win over a 
substantial number. Latest unofficial tallies suggest they may get 
a few dozen. They will not get Congresswoman Nita Lowey. It is time 
to bring closure to this sordid chapter in our nation's history. The 
New York Democrat has been a strong advocate for Women's Rights. She 
says the President's conduct was reprehensible but does not warrant 
impeachment. The President's shameful relationship with a White House 
intern, and his subsequent lies about it demand a strong rebuke from 
this House. The President deserves to be censured for his actions. 
He does not deserve to be impeached. The House is scheduled to vote 
on the Judiciary Committee's recommendation on Thursday. Paula Wolfson, 
VOA NEWS, Capitol Hill. A White House spokesman denounced the Judiciary 
Committee process as neither fair nor bipartisan. And said it is part 
of a political strategy to embarrass the President. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>