<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1700.2579 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In other news though, a study in the current issue of the journal 
proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences contains evidence 
from China providing more support for the widely held notion that 
modern humans descended from a common ancestor in Africa. That's likely 
to disappoint some anthropologists who believed that modern humans 
evolved not only in Africa. But elsewhere around the globe about the 
same time. VOA Science correspondent, Jessica Berman reports. It's 
a heated debate topic among anthropologists who study human evolution. 
Did modern people descend from a single ancestor named Homoerectus 
in Africa 200 thousand years ago and migrate to other parts of the 
world? This is commonly referred to as the "Out of Africa" theory. 
Or are humans the product of multi-regional evolution? In which Homoerectus 
left Africa en masse and then evolved into separate racial groups 
that we know today. Lee Gin, an assistant professor of human genetics 
at the University of Texas in Houston, was a member of an international 
team that examined the genetic profiles of 28 ethnic Chinese populations 
extracted from DNA and blood samples. The profiles were compared to 
those of populations in Africa. By genetically profiling the Chinese 
populations in the study, Professor Gin says it's possible to learn 
more about the origin of 200 thousand year old fossilized human remains 
unearthed recently in China. And according to Professor Gin, many 
Chinese anthropologists believe the remains are proof that modern 
humans evolved in China, outside of Africa. And we were trying to 
find out whether genetic evidence can be used to support that. And 
unfortunately, we did not find any evidence to support an independent 
origin. On the contrary, the data that we observed is consistent with 
an African origin of modern humans. The researchers also answered 
an important question about ancestral Chinese migration. It's been 
known since the early 1980's that the people in Northern China are 
genetically different from those in the South. The question has been: 
where did the two populations come from? Professor Lee Gin says his 
team's analysis shows that Chinese population migrated north. With 
the Northern Chinese population coming from Southern China. And the 
Southern Chinese originating in Southeast Asia. Professor Gin says 
the northern migration may be a vestige of a greater population split 
thousands of years ago. That resulted in the creation of three distinct 
Asiatic groups: Orientals, Native Americans, and Native Sebotiana. 
And we're trying to figure out what really happened about 60 thousand 
to 70 thousand years ago. How people, really become different. From 
each other. And what kind of migration event has happened that has 
led to the isolation. Professor Gin says a northward migration also 
suggests that modern humans, in all likelihood, got their start further 
south, in Africa. But University of Michigan anthropologist, Milford 
Walcroft says the paper doesn't prove this one way or the other. It's 
as though you're trying to tell where the milk came from by looking 
at the milkshake. By the time you get to the milkshake, you're so 
far past where the milk came from, that you can't get this information. 
Professor Walcroft remains a leading proponent of the theory of multi-regional 
evolution: which says that modern humans evolved in many parts of 
the world simultaneously. Jessica Berman, VOA NEWS, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>