<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981006.1800.2700 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hundreds of thousands of old homes and businesses across the United 
States face the wrecking ball every year. Most are simply flattened 
and hauled away to local dumps. There are ways to reuse materials 
from old homes, however, saving money and resources. It's a process 
called deconstruction. Eric Jansen reports on a nonprofit group in 
Minneapolis, Minnesota that's been in the business of recycling buildings 
for more than a year. It's a warm day in St. Paul's Dayton Bluff neighborhood, 
where four men are taking apart a Victorian home built in the 1890s. 
They're from the Green Institute, a nonprofit helping bring environmentally 
friendly business to inner-city neighborhoods. Bob Alp leads the crew 
dismantling part of the structure for the building's new owner. They're 
going to take one-third of the house down. The back portion of the 
house where two independent wings, two and a half story wings, because 
the house was a duplex, and he wanted those wings taken down and then 
converted the house from duplex to a single family dwelling. Owner 
Richard Merritt will reuse much of the material from the wings to 
rehabilitate the main part of the house. Merritt, a railroad engineer, 
is amazed at the condition and craftsmanship of the old building's 
hardware. All the doors on the second floor have working transoms. 
They're functional. It was the Victorian way. You'd open windows and 
doors and get updrafts. T They used the natural forces of nature to 
cool off. Merritt's home is one of roughly projects the Green Institute 
has worked on since launching its deconstruction services program 
last year. Mary Jane Hynan, co-owner of local contractor Whole Builders, 
brought the Institute into the project. Well, we'd been looking for 
ways to do deconstruction. We have a real interest in energy efficiency 
and reuse the materials. You can't buy the materials that are in the 
wings, so it made more sense for us to use the materials on site than 
to truck it out, pay a dumpster, put it in the landfill and then truck 
in new material which is of a lesser quality. Hynan says the materials 
savings alone will be $10,000 to $15,000. Crew foreman Bob Alp says 
this century old wood is better than most lumber available today. 
It's much tighter grain. The forests grew slowly over many, many decades 
and what happens is it gets very tight grained. When it's cut and 
milled, it won't twist. It won't warp. It won't shrink nearly as much. 
It's much stronger. Large structural pieces like joists and beams 
are especially valuable, but rafters, floorboards and siding will 
be reused. On this job, owner Merritt hired the crew and will keep 
the materials to reuse himself. But usually the Green Institute comes 
in for free. Income from these sales, along with grants, keeps the 
nonprofit going. Most materials are sold on site to contractors. Others 
end up at the Institute's Reuse Center, a retail store in Minneapolis. 
Clerk, Lisa Goldish, tapes a hold sign to a set of kitchen cabinets 
for a customer. Contractors and home owners come to the Reuse Center 
for deals on everything from nuts and bolts to cabinets, lights, lumber, 
even marble. We will be getting quite a bit more marble in from an 
apartment building owner whose team is remodeling and has marble showers 
and didn't want to see them thrown into the dumpster. Goldish says 
customers can buy materials at the Reuse Center for one-tenth to one-half 
what they would cost new. An Environment Protection Agency official 
says there may be a couple hundred deconstruction programs operating 
across the country. Most are very small and combined, save only a 
tiny fraction of the millions of board feet of lumber sent to dumps 
every year. Federal agencies are working on pilot projects to apply 
deconstruction techniques when they take down 100,000 units of public 
housing over the next two years. And before long, it may be common 
to find a new and remodeled home, wooden beams, marble and other materials 
that served homeowners admirably in a previous century. I'm Eric Jansen 
in St. Paul. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>