<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981001.1153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Security Council was poised Thursday to condemn the massacres 
of ethnic Albanian civilians in Kosovo and reinforce demands for a 
cease-fire. But the next step _ authorizing military action _ wasn't 
even being formally contemplated at the United Nations despite NATO 
preparations. Russia and China have flatly rejected the use of force 
to end the conflict between Serb forces and ethnic Albanians, who 
make up 90 percent of the southern Serb province and are fighting 
for independence. As permanent council members, Russia and China could 
veto any new resolution authorizing military action. Russia has religious 
and cultural ties to the Serbs. China is traditionally opposed to 
any military intervention into what it considers an internal matter, 
fearing a precedent could be set for its own disputes with Taiwan 
and Tibet. France, another permanent member, has indicated the council 
needed to pass another resolution to give NATO the specific political 
backing for any offensive. The United States has repeatedly said it 
believes that prior U.N. resolutions authorize NATO action, and no 
new resolution is needed. The British haven't stated a position, but 
called Thursday's emergency meeting the day they took over the Security 
Council's rotating presidency. With no sign that Russia, China or 
France had changed their positions, however, Britain and the United 
States were hoping merely to produce a press statement endorsed by 
the council that condemns the massacres. Earlier this week, diplomats, 
journalists and human rights workers saw as many as 18 mutilated bodies 
in the forests around Obrija. As well, residents in the nearby town 
of Golubovac reported Serb forces surrounded a group of refugees on 
Saturday, separated 13 men and shot them. The Serbs have denied involvement 
in the massacres. Serb Deputy Premier Vojislav Seselj on Thursday 
claimed Western countries staged the massacre ``to push through ... 
a NATO attack decision in the U.N. Security Council.'' In addition 
to condemning the massacre, Britain wanted the council to demand an 
end to the hostilities, call on Belgrade to identify and punish those 
responsible for the massacre and request the U.N. tribunal for Yugoslavia 
to widen its mandate to include these types of crimes, a diplomatic 
source said, speaking on condition of anonymity. ``I have had very 
clear representation from most members of the council that they want 
a strong condemnation of the recent atrocities on the ground in Kosovo,'' 
Britain's U.N. ambassador, Jeremy Greenstock, said Thursday as he 
headed into meetings with council members ahead of consultations. 
Britain wanted the council to also demand immediate compliance with 
its previous resolution on Sept. 23 urging a cease-fire and demanding 
a negotiated settlement, and call on the U.N. chief to issue a report 
on Kosovo by Monday, several days early. Both the council and NATO 
were looking to the report to identify Serb compliance with the Sept. 
23 resolution. Though militarily enforceable, that resolution didn't 
explicitly authorize NATO action. NATO's decision-making body, however, 
took another step Thursday to prepare airstrikes against Serb forces. 
The North Atlantic Council approved an ``activation request'' for 
the 16-member alliance to formally commit warplanes and other forces 
for an eventual air campaign, diplomats said. The council, made up 
of ambassadors from the allied nations, came no closer to taking a 
political decision to launch air raids and failed to overcome differences 
over whether NATO needs a clearer U.N. mandate before it can attack. 
NATO's military have been working for months on plans to intervene 
in Kosovo where Serbian security forces are trying to crush ethnic 
Albanian separatists. Hundreds have been killed and an estimated 275,000 
people have been driven from their homes since the crackdown began 
in February. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>