<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981001.0272 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While international outrage grew at reports of massacres of Kosovo 
civilians, ethnic Albanian leaders and an international aid organization 
declared a day of mourning Thursday in honor of a volunteer doctor 
killed in Kosovo. Sheptim Robaj, an ethnic Albanian doctor working 
for the International Committee of the Red Cross, died Wednesday of 
injuries sustained when his vehicle hit a land mine. The death highlighted 
the difficulties and dangers for aid groups trying to help some of 
the estimated 275,000 Kosovo residents driven from their homes this 
year by fighting between Serb forces and ethnic Albanian rebels. ``The 
ICRC will suspend its activities throughout the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia as a mark of respect for Dr. Sheptim Robaj,'' the Red Cross 
said in a statement Thursday. Ethnic Albanian leader Ibrahim Rugova 
proclaimed Thursday a day of mourning in Kosovo, in memory of the 
killed doctor. Also Thursday, the U.N. Security Council was holding 
informal consultations after British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook 
called for an emergency meeting to condemn the weekend massacre of 
ethnic Albanian civilians in the forests around Obrija. The council 
wasn't expected to take any major action Thursday. A statement to 
the press, condemning the massacre, was the likely outcome, council 
diplomats said. The call for the meeting, however, came as NATO ambassadors 
were finalizing plans for airstrikes against Serbs. The Contact Group 
of six states _ the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Italy 
and Russia _ was arranging to meet in London Friday to discuss the 
fighting between Serb security forces and ethnic Albanian rebels in 
Kosovo that has left hundreds dead. On Wednesday, residents of the 
western village of Golubovac said that Serbian forces surrounded a 
pocket of ethnic Albanian refugees there last Saturday and singled 
out at least 13 men to kill. They said the victims had already been 
buried, but pointed to saucer-sized pools of dried blood and empty 
cartridges in front of a fence where they said the refugees were shot. 
Earlier this week, diplomats, journalists and human rights workers 
saw as many as 18 mutilated bodies in nearby Obrija, eight kilometers 
(five miles) to the north, including those of Albanian women and children. 
The mass killings last weekend in the Drenica region, where Serb-led 
forces are trying to crush ethnic Albanian rebels, are among the most 
gruesome developments since the offensive began in February. Investigators 
for the International War Crimes Tribunal are in Kosovo, but a tribunal 
spokesman in The Hague, Netherlands, declined to discuss their work. 
In another claim, U.S.-based Human Rights Watch said late Wednesday 
that Serb police attacked a convoy of civilian vehicles Tuesday in 
Vranic in southwestern Kosovo. The New York-based rights organization 
said one of its researchers saw the bodies of four ethnic Albanian 
men who had been killed, including one who was apparently executed 
at close range and another whose face had been mutilated. ``The atrocities 
committed by the Serbian police and the Yugoslav army are at the core 
of the humanitarian crisis in Kosovo and must be stopped immediately,'' 
said Holly Cartner, executive director of the group's Europe and Central 
Asia division. The rebel Kosovo Liberation Army is seeking independence 
for Kosovo, whose population is mostly ethnic Albanian. The ethnic 
Albanians' Kosovo Information Center claimed late Wednesday that 18 
more bodies had been found around a third village, Glogovac, in the 
Drenica region. The center said the victims all showed clear signs 
of torture and that three were shot in the back of the head. The claim 
could not be confirmed, and it was possible it referred to the Golubovac 
site. There was no way to corroborate the ethnic Albanian accounts. 
Both sides have been accused of massacres in Kosovo. The government's 
Tanjug news agency called Western reports a ``media farce,'' and said 
the Obrija killing was staged to generate more pressure on Serbia, 
the main republic in Yugoslavia. Serb authorities promised earlier 
this week that troops would return to their barracks after claiming 
victory over the KLA. In Tirana, capital of neighboring Albania, Interior 
Ministry spokesman Artan Bizhga said Thursday that about 100 Serb 
soldiers were involved in a clash just 300 meters (yards) within Yugoslav 
territory early Wednesday. He said Albanian border guards also saw 
a low-flying military helicopter, but claimed there was no shooting 
from the Albanian side of the border. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>