<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981001.0851 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nathalie Tauziat rallied to upset U.S. Open champion Lindsay Davenport 
4-6, 6-1, 7-5 at the Grand Slam Cup on Thursday, preventing an all-American 
semifinal in the dlrs 6.7 million tournament. The first American in 
action Thursday, Venus Williams, used her overwhelming power to beat 
French Open champion Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario 6-3, 6-2 to set up a 
semifinal showdown with Tauziat. Tauziat, Wimbledon runner-up, overcame 
12 double-faults and 37 unforced errors to beat Davenport, who is 
ranked No. 2 in the world and who could take over the top spot next 
week. Since losing to Tauziat in the quarterfinals of Wimbledon, Davenport 
had won four tournaments, also beating the Frenchwoman on the way 
to her U.S. Open title earlier this month. Tauziat turned the match 
at the start of the second set when she broke serve in the first game. 
In the third, the two traded breaks throughout the set. Serving for 
the match at 5-4, Tauziat saw Davenport rip a backhand passing shot 
that made it 5-5. But Davenport again dropped her serve, allowing 
Tauziat to serve for the match for the second time. Davenport saved 
one match point with a lob but Tauziat fired her sixth ace to advance. 
Williams, 18, served hard on the fast indoor surface of Munich's Olympiahalle 
and Sanchez-Vicario was unable to match the American's powerful ground 
strokes. Both players were inconsistent in the first set, Williams 
dropping her serve twice and Sanchez-Vicario unable to hold three 
times. A return by the Spaniard that went long gave Williams the first 
set. Williams broke serve for a decisive 3-2 lead in the second set 
and gained another break to go up 5-2 after rallying from a 0-40 deficit 
by winning five straight points. She gained the break by hitting an 
overhead smash. The American served out the match in the next game, 
hitting a perfect volley on her second match point. ``I played well, 
but I didn't always capitalize on my opportunities,'' Williams said. 
Women are playing for the first time at the tournament that brings 
together players with best records in the four Grand Slam events of 
the year _ the Australian, French and U.S. Open and Wimbledon. Only 
one of the year's Grand Slam champions among the men is here _ Australian 
Open champion Petr Korda. But the eight women included all the champions 
and all the top-ranked players except Monica Seles. Three of the Grand 
Slam champions already have been eliminated _ Davenport, Sanchez-Vicario 
and Jana Novotna, the Wimbledon champion who was ousted Wednesday 
by Patty Schnyder. Top-ranked Martina Hingis, the Australian Open 
champion, plays Schnyder, her Swiss teammate, in the other semifinal. 
The tournament is the most lucrative per head in tennis, and Williams 
and Tauziat earned dlrs 200,000 for reaching the semifinals. Davenport 
and Sanchez-Vicario got dlrs 100,000. Williams, ranked No. 5, has 
won the last three of her five matches against Sanchez-Vicario. The 
American reached the semifinals of the U.S. Open earlier this month 
by beating Sanchez-Vicario and made the quarterfinals in the other 
three Grand Slams. Sanchez-Vicario won her fourth Grand Slam career 
title in Paris this summer and is ranked No. 4 in the world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>