<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981001.1600.1471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most know Christina Applegate as "Kelly" on "married with children." 
But in her new series, she has traded in the blond-bimbo act for a 
role as a strong single mom. Dennis Michael reports. It's been a year 
of strange weather in California, but the weather on stage seven on 
the Warner lot is something new. Dion? yes? Don't get mad at me, but 
only half the world is snowing. Christina Applegate is in rehearsal 
for the sixth episode of "Jesse," in which the former "married with 
children" star plays a single mother working in her father's bar in 
Buffalo, New York. It's a long way from Kelly bundy. It seems Applegate's 
good work on the long-running series has had a hangover effect. It's 
more of a drag for other people, it seems. It seems that other people 
have such an issue with it. I, for one, don't. I have never felt it 
to be a struggle to shake this other character off of me. And all 
of the work that I've done, I definitely try not to have any traces 
of her, I mean, you know? Because I'm doing something unique every 
time I, you know, embark on a new adventure. But it seems to be other 
people's issues more than mine. And there's really nothing I can do 
about that, except for show up and do the best job I can. Robbie Benson, 
who has directed several episodes of the show, is delighted to have 
a fresh young lead who is simultaneously a seasoned situation comedy 
pro. She's talented. She is -- she has been around enough to know 
exactly -- we can talk in shorthand. She knows exactly what I'm talking 
about. And the most important thing -- because it's something I believe 
in -- she's really a decent, good person. NBC clearly has confidence 
in "Jesse" as well. The producers of the show helped create "friends" 
and "Veronica's closet." And the network has put the new series on 
its high-profile Thursday night lineup, just before "Frasier." The 
more people who see what we're doing, the better, I think. I think 
its great, and I think we're up to it. But, yeah, it definitely comes 
with high expectations, high pressure, the spotlight on you, CNN drops 
in for interviews. You never know. George dzundza, the show's father 
figure, hasn't got any doubts. This is the funniest show in the world. 
"Jesse" is a little new to be collecting that kind of praise just 
yet. But Christina Applegate has been through many seasons, and she's 
upbeat about the future of her new show. It is a process, but, I mean, 
I think we're starting to feel comfortable in our skin, our new skin. 
Dennis Michael, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>