<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981001.1600.0037 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Reports of more killings in the Yugoslavian province of Kosovo are 
increasing the likelihood of NATO air strikes on Serb military targets. 
The U.N. security council is holding an emergency meeting today to 
make a decision on any military action. Hundreds have been killed 
in Kosovo since Serbs began a crackdown on Albanian separatists in 
February. The state department is issuing a travel warning urging 
Americans not to travel to Yugoslavia because of the prospect of military 
action. Tom Mintier has more. It was these pictures that may prompt 
NAto to take action. The all-too-familiar scenes of innocent civilians 
allegedly murdered by the Serbian military, a military now returning 
to its barracks, apparently its work finished. The question now is, 
will NATO strike back, and where? We have sought vigorously and honorably 
for a diplomatic solution. We don't want to use force. But today I 
warn President Milosevic, if it will take force Britain is ready to 
back force. Mr. cook says Yugoslav authorities continue to defy the 
U.N. resolution passed last week, which demanded an immediate halt 
to fighting in Kosovo. Prominent British politician paddy ashdown, 
just back from an inspection tour of Kosovo, says he confronted Yugoslav 
President Slobodan Milosevic directly. I told him his officials were 
lying to him. I had been amongst the villages being burned the day 
before at precisely the time the Yugoslavian authorities had said 
the operation had ended. If Serbian troops have indeed withdrawn, 
how will NATO respond militarily? Will it strike at targets not directly 
connected to the alleged atrocities? What NAto has to strike against 
is something really tangible. That's artillery, that's vehicle concentrations, 
that's fuel dumps, that's something that will send a good message 
to Belgrade. Whether the message is delivered in a diplomatic pouch 
or from the business end of British, German and American fighters 
is yet to be determined. At the White House, the response has been 
somewhat mild. We believe that the course of action, both diplomatically 
-- and should other necessary measures be considered, other options 
considered, those courses are best undertaken by countries working 
together. Some American political leaders are pushing for President 
Clinton to act. I think you will see very soon some concerted international 
response to the situation in Kosovo. On Thursday, Britain assumes 
the presidency of the U.N. security council. Politically, it will 
be a delicate balance, calling for military action as its first act, 
or more dialogue. After what has happened in the past few days in 
Kosovo, the choice may be easier. Tom Mintier, CNN, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>