<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981001.2100.0643 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us tonight, one of the more authoritative living voices on the 
subject of constitutional law in America, laurence tribe has written 
several books on constitutional law, teaches the subject at Harvard 
University. Is with us tonight from Boston. Professor, it's great 
to have you with us. Great to be here. I know you've gone back over 
the document. I know that's a daily process for you. I know you know 
the federalist papers very well. What, in your estimation, in this 
document that's supposed to live and breathe and grow with the times, 
what do you think the 1990's version of high crimes and misdemeanors 
could encompass of all the charges we have arrayed in front of us? 
Is it the one about the president abusing the seal of the president, 
the office, his lawyers to enforce a charge to fight a charge he knew 
to be true? no. I don't think that one will do it. In fact of all 
the claims made by Kenneth Starr, the one that is probably the least 
weighty, but the one that he tries to fit into the category of abuse 
of official power, because that's what the concept of high crimes 
and misdemeanors is ultimately about, abuse of power, is the one about 
basically making legal arguments that did not prevail. If we get into 
a situation where we can impeach and remove a president because he 
invokes legal arguments to protect the office simply because he doesn't 
in the end win, we're going to be in very terrible shape. I think 
that carefully viewed, none of the accusations made by Kenneth Starr 
involves the kind of attack on the system of government, the abuse 
of executive authority that is illustrated by the first two examples 
the framers gave -- treason and bribery. Because it says treason, 
bribery, and other high crimes and misdemeanors, and historically 
the framers went back basically to 14th century England to find those 
words to express the idea that they were not talking about garden 
variety crime. It doesn't even need to be a crime. They were talking 
about taking the presidency and twisting it to make it an instrument 
against the nation. And I don't think we've got this here in all likelihood. 
There are some pretty smart lawyers in Congress then, knowing that, 
and they must -- they can all read the federalist papers, the point 
where Madison jumped in and Jefferson was writing and Madison added 
a little bit. Why are we proceeding along this road then? I think 
we're proceeding along this road because partisan politics is the 
order of the day, rather than high principle, and as the judicial 
branch, the Supreme Court does not play any role here. It does not 
police the process so that although the concept of high crimes and 
misdemeanors is actually quite well understood, flexible but not nearly 
as open ended as your earlier commentator professor rothstein suggested 
-- although that's true, there is no cop on the beat, and therefore 
in a sense the house can get away with murder, and the Senate can 
go along as well. I think we really have to remember that what is 
at stake is not just the fate of William Jefferson Clinton but the 
fate of the republican, that we are making a very important precedent 
here that will affect decades and maybe centuries of our nation's 
history and it may sound silly to make a plea to statesmanship and 
to patriotism, but unless we transcend narrow party divisions, we're 
going to cause a grave injury to the nation. Think about all the case 
law that's been invented in this case so far, and I know you do, professor. 
What -- from the ability to sue a sitting president, what do you think 
is the most regrettable instance thus far? I guess the most regrettable 
instance is that we have contrived to put in place an unaccountable 
public official who can spend a limitless amount of money and use 
tactics that are virtually uncontrolled in order to lay a trap for 
a sitting president who created the problem himself by behaving recklessly 
in the White House, who ought to have admitted the truth earlier, 
but who walked into the trap and who in effect set things up so that 
in combination with the independent counsel we have distorted the 
strength of the presidency, made the president much more dependent 
upon the Congress, moved closer toward a parliamentary system than 
the framers ever imagined. I think that's more important than any 
one of the individual events like conducting a trial of a sitting 
president or rejecting the secret service privilege or rejecting certain 
versions of the lawyer-client privilege for the president. Just for 
clarity, we have a few seconds here. Are you saying that Monica Lewinsky 
was a trap or using the word small letter T? Well, she I think was 
not so much the trap. The trap was dragging her and the president 
into a civil case about Paula Jones that had nothing to do with consensual 
sex and then in effect putting the president in a bind in the grand 
jury. He has only himself to thank for all of this, but because we've 
created this unaccountable independent counsel Kenneth Starr, we have 
taken the system of the presidency and its relationship to Congress 
and twisted it out of shape in a way that is really dangerous for 
the future. Professor laurence tribe, professor of constitutional 
law, Harvard University. We're happy to have you on the broadcast 
tonight. Thank you very much for coming in. Good to be with you, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>