<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981001.2100.1124 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us tonight with their perspective are two members of the Judiciary 
committee. Republican congressman Charles Canady from Florida. Democratic 
congressman Thomas Barrett from Wisconsin. Both with us from Capitol 
Hill. Congressman Barrett, we'll begin with you. Are you at all swayed 
by what you just heard from professor tribe? All right. We are not 
hearing congressman Barrett to our great regret. Let's try the same 
question to Charles Canady while we try to fix microphones. I have 
a great deal of respect for professor tribe as a scholar but he's 
also a well-known partisan. He himself is not above purposeship and 
I think he takes a narrow constricted view of the impeachment power. 
Now I think the impeachment power needs to be carefully used. It should 
not be lightly taken, but I believe this if the president of the United 
States commits perjury before a grand jury, that's a very serious 
matter, because the president has the pre-eminent duty under our system 
of taking care that the laws be faithfully executed. If he commits 
perjury, instead of being a defender of the rule of law he has become 
one who attacks the rule of law and I think that is indeed subversive 
of our whole system of government. Is that on a level with treason 
and some of the other things Madison and Jefferson might have had 
in mind? Of course they did not limit it to treason and bribery. High 
crimes and misdemeanors was phrasology that came from the English 
system and quite frankly under the parliamentary system it was used 
for a whole range of offenses by administrators of the crown and involving 
misconduct of a variety of sorts, so it was not nearly as limited 
as it has been presented by professor tribe in the English experience 
which, of course, the founding fathers looked to when they chose that 
language. Now congressman Barrett, we would like to ask you the same 
question only this time I am assured we can hear your answer. So we'll 
try it that way. I think the professor made some very good arguments 
but the real question we face next week is whether we're going to 
determine whether the conduct of the president, even as a -- even 
as alleged, if it's true, if that would reach the level of high crimes 
and misdemeanors and that's one of the concerns that we have, is that 
we're going into the set of hearings without even defining what a 
high crime or misdemeanor is and I think in order for us to have a 
fair adjudication we should know the standard we're going to be applying 
with the set of facts before us. Is there a process where you can 
take some great minds around the country, let's say for the sake of 
argument congressman tribe is a radical lefty as has been charged 
before but you take his brief and you take others and then you make 
a hybrid definition of what, for the purposes of this discussion in 
the 1990's, meets the threshold? I certainly think we can. I think 
that's what we should be doing in the hearings that are going to be 
starting. I'm assuming that the resolution is going to pass the house 
and we're going to have an inquiry, and I think the first step in 
that inquiry is, again, determining whether -- whether this meets 
the standard of high crimes and misdemeanors, and to do that, we can 
bring some of the great minds from the country and testify before 
this committee to determine what the next step should be. Congressman 
Canady, is there any reason to think this is not going to be a straight 
up and down party line vote? Of course this got started off with a 
partisan vote. The democratic leadership voted for the resolution 
that we're acting under now. I don't know what's going to happen in 
the Judiciary committee. Unfortunately the members of the Judiciary 
committee have been out of step even with the democratic members of 
the house at large. I can't tell you what kind of vote we're going 
to have in the committee. I can tell you that we're doing everything 
we can to conduct this in a way that is fair and that you feel and 
deliberative. We believe that it's important that we follow a process 
here that we would be willing to subject any president to, whether 
it's of our party or another party. Fundamental fairness will be followed. 
That's essential. We understand that in order for this process to 
have credibility, that has to be the case, and we're committed to 
that. Congressman Barrett, a few seconds before break, congressman 
Conyers, your leader, didn't seem to think today that it was fair 
so far. I think he said it was half fair. It was moving the right 
direction and I voted for the original resolution but I've been concerned 
having sat through the hearings now as a member of the committee that 
it has not gotten off to a fair start and I think fairness is Paramount 
here. We cannot have a partisan proceeding and in order to do that, 
I think we have to put our focus on the Starr report and I think that's 
one of the differences you're going to see next Monday. We want to 
focus on the Starr report because that's what's in front of Congress 
right now. Gentlemen, thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>