<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981001.2100.1559 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are back continuing our discussion now with congressmen Canady 
and Thomas Barrett. Congressman Canady, congressman Conyers had some 
tough words today. Said he was going to appeal to Henry Hyde. Said 
it wouldn't be his last stab at bipartisanship but he said he was 
going to really lobby, follow up with a personal visit. The democrats 
at the end of the day don't have the votes on the committee. Of course, 
Mr. Conyers has previously said he wants us to follow the Watergate 
model. Mr. Gephardt has said the same thing. As a matter of fact he 
wrote a letter saying time and time again he stated that we should 
follow the Watergate model. The chairman of the committee, Mr. Hyde, 
has proposed a resolution that follows the Watergate model and now 
Mr. Conyers and the other democrats are objecting to that. So one 
day they want the Watergate model, the next day they don't. We want 
to work with all the members of the committee. We think that's important, 
but we also think that it's important that we be able to conduct this 
process in a way that is -- is comprehensive. I agree with what representative 
Barrett said about focusing on the Lewinsky matter. I think that's 
where our focus should be but I don't think we should be arbitrarily 
foreclosured from considering other information about other matters 
for instance that the independent counsel might send us. He has other 
matters under investigation. He's indicated that in his report. If 
he believes he needs to send us information, we should not be foreclosed 
from considering that. What's stopping him from picking up the phone 
or sending a letter down to the house, taking everybody out of their 
misery and saying we are going down to more eavepbs. We're done, we 
think it will be two more months -- the veil of secrecy in his just 
created job is really of his own making, isn't it? Not really. I think 
in the report, he indicated to us there are several matters under 
investigation and he hopes to conclude the investigation of those 
matters soon. He did not set a timetable but did indicate that he 
hoped to do that soon, as I read the report, so hopefully that's the 
case. Hopefully there won't be any additional information to be sent 
to us. A few seconds, wouldn't you like to hear more from the independent 
counsel? Sure. Think he should get his job done and I think the American 
people want this issue resolved, whether you love the president or 
hate the president, the common thread you hear is let's put this matter 
behind us. We are four weeks from an election and what we are seeing 
right now I think is an attempt to politicize this as much as possible. 
What the American people want is they want focus, they want us to 
look at the Starr report, they want finality, they want this done 
and done in a fair manner and that's all we're asking and I think 
we should be able to work together to reach those goals. Thank you 
both. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>