<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981001.2100.2817 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are back with presidential historian Michael beschloss talking 
about some of the recently released recordings of President Lyndon 
Johnson's White House telephone calls and before we roll this next 
conversation, Michael, it is with Pierre salinger, without giving 
away the content here, you point out in volume one that Johnson somehow 
thought that salinger could make him the magic president that Johnson 
perceived salinger had done for Kennedy, so he kept him on as press 
secretary for a time. That's for sure. You know, he had seen John 
Kennedy in the Senate and hadn't thought much of him, and then saw 
Americans love John Kennedy as president and thought this must have 
been some trick involved and perhaps the trick was the man whom Kennedy 
had appointed press secretary. Well, the following conversation, Johnson, 
who is still in a work mode calling salinger at home -- you'll hear 
the background noise and Lyndon Johnson has a big idea, so big he 
wants Pierre salinger to sit down to hear it. Michael beschloss, whatever 
happened to the idea? Did she ever get the phone call? She got the 
message and she turned it down because the last thing she felt like 
doing a few weeks after John Kennedy's death with two small children 
was taking on a job like ambassador to Mexico or ambassador to Paris, 
which Johnson also offered. You know, Brian, he was always trying 
to find some way to sort of rope her into the Johnson administration, 
either by taking a job or by coming to the White House for a state 
dinner so that people would think that she was on his side. He was 
always terrified that somehow she would come to the democratic convention 
in 1964 and somehow call on the delegates to vote for Robert Kennedy 
for president or vice president. He thought that having her allied 
to him in this way would help to prevent that from happening. What 
are the other greatest hits as you've gone through this for lack of 
a better term second batch that -- and when is your next book, the 
compilation of them along with your commentary coming out? My next 
will be out in two years. The paperback of the first vm out this week, 
of course, but I think the other thing out from this batch that is 
interesting is there are 50 conversations that relate to the fact 
that two weeks before the 1964 election Johnson's chief aide Walter 
Jenkins was arrested for being involved with another man in a wymca. 
He was immediately fired. Johnson was worried this might I understand 
his chance of being elected over Barry Goldwater. The interesting 
thing was that in those times he was scarcely questioned about it 
in -- and what could have been a major sex scandal died very quick. 
Michael beschloss here tonight to walk us through and talk us through 
what is uncharted history really, hearing for the first time the former 
president and in this case tonight a former first lady. Michael, thank 
you very much. As always, anytime you can come on. Appreciate it. 
Thank you. Nice to be here, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>