<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981001.2100.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
first tonight the signs of what may be a down turn to come, a big 
and bad drop for the Dow today, down over 200 points and a huge hit 
for the NASDAQ. A history maker in fact. Fourth worst ever. If what 
it means is it's a part of the worries that is worrying analysts these 
days -- not just that some huge blew chip stocks got hammered today, 
not that the fed appears to be worried about something, this could 
mean pink slips, this would mean selloffs, this could mean a long 
cold winter. We are joined tonight by CNBC's Ron Insana. He is in 
their studios where they watched this play out live on television 
all day long. It's one of those months that hasn't been friendly to 
the stock market investor over the last many years. October a spooky 
month for investors. It was very scary today. What's happening on 
Wall Street, part of a much bigger picture. A global economic crisis 
that still threatens to come closer and closer to home. Indeed today 
as Walters forgetted about this deepening economic crisis around the 
world, we also had news that Japan's recession just keeps getting 
worse, not better. That prompted a selloff in stock markets overseas 
from Asia to Europe and to Latin America as well. Additionally those 
fears of a U.S. recession continue to grow and that undermined the 
stock market's confidence today and led to that 200-point drop. Federal 
reserve talked about a so-called credit crunch. That's an environment 
in which banks make fewer and fewer loans to businesses which could 
precipitate the slowdown that you talked about a moment ago. Corporate 
profits still a big worry of late. The third quarter profit reporting 
period is still to come. So far the news has been Negative, and there 
are increasing worries that there are more hedge funds like long-term 
capital with trouble. Now folks here at CNBC have tried to confirm 
rumors of other firms in trouble, anybody who is rumored to be having 
difficulties vehemently denied those rumors but it was one of the 
things to unsettle the market today. The Dow almost did reflect as 
badly as bad as the news was. We would have expected in this volatile 
market a Dow down more than it was, 200 points. Indeed and it was 
down as much as 255 at one juncture. The Dow right now is testing 
some critical levels that market watchers are keeping a very close 
eye on. It held about 7600 in today's session. But back in September 
the first day of September, in fact, one nothing, the Dow fell as 
low as 7400 on an intraday basis. This is the level players will watch 
going forward. If it holds investors might be encouraged that the 
worst is past. If it does not, they'll feel October is going to be 
one of those months that just brings bad news to investors. I heard 
one analyst say today we're entering a great shopping period for those 
with the money to buy up the blue chip stocks. Absolutely. Some of 
the really economically sensitive stocks have come down hard. Banks 
and brokers have gotten very inexpensive by recent standards. Even 
retail stocks, big stocks like Wal-Mart have fallen over three points 
a day for the last three days. These recession worries making a lot 
of the high fliers a lot cheaper than they used to be. Ron Insana 
in the CNBC studios tonight where the opening bell just can't come 
soon enough in the morning. Thank you very much. Thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>