<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981001.2100.2265 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He was a colossal figure in American politics. He could cajole and 
soothe, Bully and comfort. He usually got what he wanted. He ended 
up a defeated man whose towering achievements for the poor and minorities 
were dwarfed by a war that eventually gobbled up and destroyed Lyndon 
baines Johnson. When he died at the age of 64, he knew many of his 
most important phone calls had been recorded on tape. After he died, 
his wife and others agreed to release them. The second group of tapes 
is now out. The first of them having been immortalized in a book by 
presidential historian and author Michael beschloss. Michael beschloss 
is with us tonight from Washington to talk us through this new group 
of Johnson tapes. Michael, good evening. It's great to have you with 
us tonight. Thank you. I feel the same way. Mechanically, how is this 
working now? Is this a slow drip of tapes? You took care of the first 
batch and how many will be in this next release? Well, this next release 
is something like about 40 to 60 hours. These tapes will be coming 
out for years, and from Lyndon Johnson now 25 years dead, it's sort 
of the gift that keeps on giving. We want to run the first batch of 
sound here, and then we'll come back and talk about it. What you're 
about to hear are telephone conversations between Lyndon Johnson remembering 
that these were recorded just about a month after the assassination 
of J.F.K., between Lyndon Johnson and Jacqueline Kennedy, who to Johnson's 
great dismay has not come back to the White House for a visit. Ended 
up not visiting again until the Nixon administration. They've been 
described by some journalists as flirtatious. Some would quarrel with 
that as during most of these recordings, often lady bird Johnson is 
standing right next to the president while he's on the phone. Let's 
listen to the conversation. The words of Jacqueline Kennedy. Michael 
beschloss, you've been listening along with us. Fill us in. What do 
we need to know by way of context and for background about what we 
just heard? You know, the first one is that Johnson and Jackie Kennedy 
-- when Johnson was vice president had had quite a good relationship, 
certainly a lot less complicated than Johnson's relations with the 
Kennedy brothers and at the same time that Johnson was trying to comfort 
her after that assassination, that hell they had both been through 
at the plaza, Johnson as usual was operating on a political level 
as well. He wanted to make sure that Jacqueline Kennedy by then, easily 
the most loved human being in the United States, was friendly to him, 
particularly because in 1964 he was very worried that Robert Kennedy 
might either try to push his way on to the Johnson ticket or somehow 
challenge Johnson's effort to run for president. We have an extraordinary 
idea by Lyndon Johnson that might have put him decades ahead of his 
time. In the next piece of tape we want to play -- we have to fit 
a break in, and our tape playing and discussion with historian and 
author Michael beschloss will continue when we come back not. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>