<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981001.2100.0265 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is another worry afoot. The story that will not go away. Tomorrow 
the Judiciary committee is expected to release yet another round of 
documents from Kenneth Starr's investigation of the president, including 
partial transcripts of the tape recordings, the famous ones Linda 
Tripp made of her conversations with Monica Lewinsky. Then will come 
the fight before the vote to start official impeachment hearings. 
Republicans want to get going, open it up wide. Democrats are fighting 
to keep the lid on, but they don't have the votes. If they vote to 
hold impeachment hearings as expected on Monday, there's a complicated 
process ahead. We have asked NBC news "today" show correspondent Joe 
Johns to take us through it. Congress is taking its cue from the nation's 
founding document. In the words of the constitution, a president shall 
be removed from office on impeachment for and conviction of treason 
and bribery or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Treason and bribery 
may be simple concepts to understand, but what are high crimes and 
misdemeanors? It's very difficult to define high crimes and misdemeanors. 
The drafters of the constitution left it purposely vague and we haven't 
had enough experience with impeaching presidents for there to be any 
built up ecretions of law from decisions. Constitutional law professor 
Paul rothstein has been lecturing congressmen on both sides of the 
aisle who may soon have to decide President Clinton's fate. They want 
to know what is the extent of the power that they have. I think that 
it's very difficult for them to grasp that there are no answers, that 
it is really up to them within certain limits marked out by the constitution. 
Limits that include steps Congress must follow. The first step is 
Monday. The Judiciary committee is expected to vote on holding an 
impeachment inquiry. It then goes to the house for approval by majority 
vote. Only then can the Judiciary committee begin hearings. During 
Watergate, the hearings concluded with a vote to approve articles 
of impeachment essentially a list of indictments. At this stage in 
the process, President Nixon with barely any support in Congress resigned. 
Absent a resignation, the house then votes on impeachment but it doesn't 
end there. Then the Senate takes over to act as jury in the trial 
of a president. If it gets that far this time, judge William rehnquist 
will preside. Two house members will present the prosecution case 
and President Clinton will be defend by his own lawyers. To remove 
him from office, the Senate will have to vote a 2/3 majority. The 
Senate has never convicted an impeached president. But here in the 
old Senate chamber in 1834 President Andrew Jackson was censured following 
a prolonged dispute involving banking legislation. Three years later 
when democrats supporting Jackson took control of the Senate, they 
voted to clear his name. The Senate held its only trial of a president 
in 1968. President Andrew Johnson's crime was political. He was thought 
too soft on the south after the civil war. In a pretv era, tickets 
were issued for the public gallery in what historians now agree was 
a circus. The forefathers would have looked in horror at Andrew Johnson's 
impeachment and been very happy it failed a conviction by only one 
vote in the Senate. No one yet knows whether it will go that far for 
President Clinton. There are a lot of ifs along the way. The process 
would take not weeks but months, during which time the White House 
would be trying to strike a deal and then there are the midterm elections, 
the big swing the first week of November could dramatically affect 
the process. Joe Johns, NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>