<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981001.2100.1918 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Washington today, the state department warned American citizens 
against traveling to the former Yugoslavia. Top U.S. officials, national 
security advisor Samuel Berger, Madeline Albright, William Cohen held 
closed door briefings and privately U.S. officials established a 10-day 
deadline for Slobodan Milosevic to stand down or else as they put 
it. Of course it was not so private. They did tip "the New York Times" 
with an eye toward getting out a certain message. With more on that 
story we are joined by "the New York Times'" Steven erlanger whose 
story appears in tomorrow's paper. Here we are again with television 
-- it was the pictures that came out of there that forced a decision 
by Bill Clinton actually when he was on the putting green outside 
the west wing that the U.S. should get in the game and we are looking 
at a similar situation here. I think you're absolutely right. I mean, 
there is the power of the image. These kind of atrocities have been 
going on for months now, and no one has been really very interested, 
but there's a kind of atrocity threshold -- that's the phrase of the 
day -- and for many senators, particularly republican senators, that 
atrocity threshold has been reached and it's been reached more in 
Europe also. I mean, you saw the British labor party being pushed 
really during its party conference to do something about these horrible 
pictures from Kosovo. So at last NAto allies seem willing TO use force. 
The United States will not act by itself but frankly the real hope 
is the credible threat of force will push Slobodan Milosevic to back 
down so no one has to use force at all. It's the usual game. Whether 
to -- whether it will work this time or not, we really will have to 
see. It's the if the tree falls in the Woods question, but now that 
there are pictures there will be action and for the American viewers 
watching tonight and those who will read your piece in "the New York 
Times" tomorrow, what should we look for, the touch stones along this 
process we're about to see? How will this differ from what we have 
come to know as the former Yugoslavia? Well, I think what has changed 
now is there seems to be a will in Washington as well as in NatO allies 
that if Milosevic does not AT least declare victory now and do what 
we want him to do, now that he's accomplished most of his aims in 
Kosovo, NAto really will have to respond TO keep any kind of credibility. 
That's what's really changed. So a week from now or so, NAto should 
have the political authorization required TO use military force. Once 
that is done, then force would be possible, but officials tell me 
that even built into that last step there will be some time for Mr. 
Milosevic to look at the writing on the wall and decide if he really 
wants to be hit hard by NAto or whether he should simply do what everyone 
is asking him to do, which is pull out the thugs, stop the violence, 
let people return TO their shattered homes before winter really sets 
in and open negotiations with the earth earth. It doesn't seem to 
be a -- the ethnic Albanians. Steven erlanger, thank you very much. 
Thanks, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>