<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For three weeks, Abbe Lowell hunched down on the thin carpeting in 
the hallway of the Ford Building, just outside the vault securing 
the independent counsel's documents, a cell phone in one hand and 
a portable file folder in the other. He was a long way from the comfortable 
surroundings of his downtown law office. Then, when his office computers 
finally arrived this week, there arose another indignity. The computers 
seemed to have an odd glitch; Democrats couldn't click their way past 
an oversize glossy photograph of the Judiciary Committee's Republican 
chairman, Henry Hyde of Illinois. ``I can assure you that until this 
weekend, I and the consultants that came on with the Starr report 
had no offices, no computers, no phones,'' Lowell said in an interview 
last week, still a touch sore from the head butting that makes most 
congressional Democrats seethe as members of the minority party. Only 
a directive by Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia put an end to the 
triage operation. For Lowell, perhaps the most difficult challenge 
of all in the coming months, as the Judiciary Committee grapples with 
impeachment, is cozying up to the idea that this is one case he cannot 
easily beat into submission. At the core, it may seem ordinary _ a 
tale of sex and lies _ but the trappings are considerably more complex 
and far-reaching. ``I recognize that, without being excessively humble 
or modest, I am a very small part of a very big place called the House 
of Representatives that's dealing with this,'' Lowell said, surrounded 
by an assortment of boxes in his new offices at the Ford Building. 
``For someone who likes to be in control of his case, this is a great 
education to know how little control I can assert, how events go faster 
than my ability to even blink.'' In their choice of a lawyer to oversee 
the expected impeachment inquiry for the minority, Democrats took 
a blatantly opposite path than their Republican counterparts. While 
Republicans chose an outsider, a street-smart lawyer from Chicago 
who shies away from the limelight, Democrats opted for a savvy Washington 
insider who relishes his role working for the panel and soaks in the 
klieg lights. Lowell, 46, has made his name as an aggressive trial 
lawyer defending smeared or fallen politicians, most of them Democrats, 
as well as players on the periphery of elected office. The former 
House Speaker Jim Wright, a Texas Democrat, hired him as his lawyer 
when he faced ethics charges in Congress. He has also represented, 
among others, Dan Rostenkowski, the one-time chairman of the House 
Ways and Means Committee who went to prison for mail fraud, and Mario 
Biaggi, a former New York representative who was convicted for bribery, 
extortion and other crimes. To Democrats, Lowell, a Columbia University 
man through law school, seemed like a natural for the sex-and-lies 
charges Clinton faces on Capitol Hill. Calm, quick-witted and precise 
with his words, Lowell held three valuable assets: He knows the law, 
is sure-footed on Capitol Hill and has a knack for communicating. 
``Let's assume, for example, you were arrested in x location and that 
you are hauled up on charges in that jurisdiction,'' said Bob Bauer, 
a longtime legal adviser for the House Democratic leader, Dick Gephardt 
of Missouri, who helped recruit Lowell. ``How many times would you 
hear someone suggest to you, you should have a local lawyer around, 
someone who knows the court house and the issue,'' he added. ``You 
have to understand this community, how it works, how Congress operates, 
how members think through issues and react to them. Somebody who is 
completely unfamiliar with that forum would have difficulty with that.'' 
Plus, Bauer said, ``He doesn't shy away from intellectual combat.'' 
Born in the Bronx and raised in Long Island, Lowell said New York 
still courses through his veins, although Washington was where he 
wanted to practice law, and law was the only career he wanted to pursue. 
This was partly because the people who impressed him most as he was 
growing up were all activist lawyers, and partly because of his rich 
uncle. ``He always came to visit in a really nice Buick and gave me 
chocolate cigars,'' said Lowell, who is married with two children 
and teaches criminal procedure law at Georgetown. ``I think I associated 
law with being able to drive a fancy Buick and having chocolate cigars, 
which also appealed to me.'' His father, a World War II veteran who 
was shot down over enemy territory, worked as an insurance agent and 
was also a musician and professional photographer. His mother spent 
her days as a doctor's assistant. He described himself as a ``normal 
kid.'' A batch of elementary school report cards unearthed by parents 
recently were disturbingly prescient, he said. He talked too much, 
his teachers noted, bothered his classmates while they were still 
working on their assignments, and never took no for an answer. As 
a teen-ager, Lowell fell in with the civil rights movement, and then 
the anti-war movement, as a rally organizer and a register-to-vote 
evangelist. It was not something his parents understood, at least 
initially. ``My fights weren't whether I could have the car on the 
weekend,'' he said, ``They were, can I go march on the Pentagon?'' 
But his involvement with the civil rights and anti-war movements marked 
him indelibly, he said. ``I guess social change turned into government 
process for me,'' he said. ``Having an impact on the government was 
part of my upbringing through those two movements.'' Law in Washington, 
he said, allows him ``to work on issues or on cases that can impact 
on government, to make it more responsive to people and to check its 
power, and those were the themes of my growing up.'' The country, 
he said, has never washed away the bitter aftertaste of Watergate, 
the defining moment of that era. But Lowell is quick to mention that 
the Clinton-Lewinsky imbroglio is no Watergate, despite its overtones 
of perjury and obstruction of justice. In his view, Watergate was 
something altogether different, and the public recognizes that distinction. 
The polls, he said, reflect that. His job is to see if the House reflects 
that as well. ``The report, while it's dressed up to be something 
which invokes the impeachment word, really, at its heart, is about 
a private affair with a president and a woman,'' Lowell said. ``It 
has all the trappings of being important, but a lot of people think 
that underneath, it is not as important.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>