<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Not long ago, I stood in Straus Square, a little island in the middle 
of East Broadway, paying my respects to the Forward building, which 
will soon be converted into condominiums. At 10 stories, it's still 
the tallest thing on the block, though imprisoned by scaffolding so 
that I had to cross all the way to Seward Park and peer up to see 
the enormous rust-red letters still spelling out the name ``FORVERTS'' 
in Yiddish at the top of the building. I had to come closer to make 
out the four faces _ Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Karl Liebknecht 
and Ferdinand Lassalle _ looking out in humorless relief above the 
entrance, like gargoyles meant to scare away superstition and the 
imprisoning past to which they now themselves belong. I have been 
told that the Chinese characters that have been added to the building's 
facade, by the nondenominational church that now operates there, declare 
that ``Jesus Saves,'' which must infuriate the four terra cotta heroes 
of European socialism, not to mention the ghosts of old Forward staffers 
whose secular, socialist passions left them, despite a strong sense 
of peoplehood, ambivalent about religion of any sort. To add insult 
to injury, I myself have come to the Lower East Side not to visit 
the building that once housed the Jewish Daily Forward but to take 
a tour of the Eldridge Street Synagogue, a five-minute walk away. 
But having taken the F train to the East Broadway stop near the newspaper 
building, I am drawn to it and find it difficult to pull away. I should 
confess at this point that despite the requisite Hebrew school trip, 
many visits in later life and at least one walking tour, the Lower 
East Side has always been an emblem not only of topographical confusion 
(I don't do well where streets are named, not numbered), but also 
of a larger sort of confusion. I've never been sure what, if any, 
relationship the neighborhood has to me. (I understand this is a Jewish 
problem. I never find myself wondering what relationship SoHo or TriBeCa 
have to me.) But on the walk west along Canal to get to Eldridge, 
I pass streets whose very names _ Essex and Orchard and even the once-sinister 
Allen, where the El and the prostitutes were _ sing with a certain 
suggestion of meaning, even if I'm not quite sure what that meaning 
is. This neighborhood was once so crowded with Jews _ in 1895, its 
population density was second only to that of Bombay _ that their 
lingering impression seems to have rubbed itself into the very stones 
as well as the larger culture. There are even tenements on East Broadway, 
designed by the Herter brothers (who built the Eldridge Street Synagogue), 
that are engraved with Jewish stars. Nevertheless, I have what may 
be an American-born, suburban-bred resentment of the way writers have 
used the Lower East Side, and neighborhoods like it, as touchstones 
of Jewish authenticity _ as if to be an immigrant was to be most fully 
Jewish, with all later generations merely representing the diminution 
of a primordial state. But the truth is, so many of the contradictions 
of Jewish life were carved in stone here that the Lower East Side 
has a sort of irresistible allegorical feel, so much so that when 
I wrote my novel ``Eve's Apple,'' I had my narrator, who is obsessed 
with immigrants, get lost as he roams the area _ a dislocated, sentimental 
soul-seeking connection. But connection to what? Ambivalence is virtually 
baked into the Lower East Side, where the urge to preserve old ways 
and the wish to throw them off, to make a home and to run away are 
still felt. I cannot speak for the Chinese immigrants who now fill 
the neighborhood with bursting vitality, but it was certainly true 
of the Jews who once lived here. One has only to read one of I .B. 
Singer's American novels _ serialized in The Forward _ to experience 
the multiple impulses to belong and to remain different. Singer hung 
out, along with Yiddish poets and leftists and journalists, at the 
Garden Cafeteria _ now the Wing Shoon diner _ at East Broadway and 
Rutgers, just down the street from the Forward building. One can imagine 
the debates about the future, about Communism and Socialism, American 
capitalism and the death of religion, conducted in Yiddish, the-thousand-year-old 
language of the Jewish people. The debates have changed, but at their 
core will always remain a tension in some sense embodied by the newspaper 
and the synagogue. One institution preached redemption through politics, 
the other left messianic rectification of the world to God. Which 
brings me to Eldridge Street and the grand, beautiful, dilapidated 
synagogue between Canal and Division, which, like the Forward building, 
now lives behind scaffolding. Built in 1887 to rival the elegant Reform 
synagogues uptown, the Orthodox Eldridge Street Synagogue was the 
first house of worship in America built by Eastern European immigrants. 
Its founders were the sort of capitalists railed against by The Forward: 
Isaac Gellis (the hot dog man) and Sandor Jarmulowsky, whose high-rise 
bank still stands on Canal Street a few blocks from the Forward building. 
Nevertheless, many of the 1,000 worshipers who packed into the sanctuary 
during High Holiday services were working-class immigrants, experiencing 
a taste of Old World religious grandeur financed by American capitalist 
zeal. The two buildings are in some sense physical emblems of opposite 
impulses. The narrow, towering Forward building _ once topped by an 
electric sign _ thrust itself into the New York skyline, a symbol 
of progress, a beacon to workingmen and women eager to master the 
ways of American society and to improve that society with their political 
passions. Crowned with a large clock, it was a building by which one 
literally told time. The Western facade of the Eldridge Street Synagogue 
presents the visitor with a gigantic rose window, fashioned of 12 
interlocking circles, a clock telling only eternal time. Inside, the 
soaring walls and ceiling, painted in part with a false sky and stars, 
suggest the wish for a world apart. The upstairs gallery for women, 
the rich dark wood, the Moorish windows of stained glass, the hanging 
brass chandeliers, were evocative of any place but America. The opulent 
interior has taken a terrible beating, but if anything the power of 
the place has only been enhanced by the passage of time. The building 
reflects the slow decay of a dwindling community but suggests as well 
something much more sudden and dramatic _ a kind of Pompeian calamity. 
What in fact happened was that in the 1950s, the depleted congregation 
simply locked the doors of the main sanctuary and took up permanent 
residence in the basement, where services continue to attract about 
25 worshipers on the Sabbath, a number that doubles on the holidays. 
In the 1970s, a scholar and tour leader unlocked the doors, gaping 
up at the 70-foot, rain-ruined ceiling where pigeons roosted in the 
women's section. Since then, the Eldridge Street Project has spent 
some $3 million stabilizing the building and hopes to raise some $5 
million more to complete the renovations. Fortunately, the sanctuary 
still has about it a state of half-forgotten reality, like a dream 
the basement sometimes had about the grand upstairs world and the 
days when Cantor Yossele Rosenblatt prayed on the High Holidays and 
mounted policemen patrolled Eldridge Street to control the crowds 
and the young Eddie Cantor (who lived at 19 Eldridge St.) sang in 
the choir. There is also an added poignancy in the knowledge that 
so many of the European synagogues that inspired the Eldridge Street 
Synagogue were destroyed in the Holocaust; what was once merely the 
echo now seems the lonely voice itself. At the same time, it is clear 
that the rose windows and other architectural flourishes were as much 
intended to make the synagogue a competitive counterpart to Christian 
churches as to evoke Old World Orthodoxy. Now, however, the patched 
and peeling walls and ceiling, the grand windows plugged with factory 
glass, the chandeliers merely implied by dangling ropes, the refurbished 
Ten Commandments above the ark (which had been reduced to five until 
a local workman carved another tablet), all give the space a sort 
of post-modern contemporaneity, perfectly suited to its new use as 
a place for readings and exhibits. In the same way the empty Forward 
building, with its landmark status, its Yiddish and Chinese, its 20th-century 
aspirations and 19th-century heroes, is a sort of palimpsest more 
complicated than its once monolithic facade conveyed. It's these unexpected 
reversals that make the neighborhood so complex and so appealing and, 
I realize, give it its enduring relevance. In its own way, the Eldridge 
Street Synagogue was a modern enterprise: its first rabbi wanted to 
incorporate English in the service to encourage participation. The 
Forward, for all its secularism, had a weekly commentary on the Torah 
portion for years. The newspaper, a Lower East Side fixture, moved 
uptown in the 1970s and, despite its Yiddishist origins, created the 
English newspaper where I work. Though a traditional congregation 
still prays in the basement of the Eldridge Street Synagogue, it is 
dedicating its renovated sanctuary to cultural programs, one of which 
is even called the Garden Cafeteria, named for the old hangout that 
once thrived next to The Forward. In a sense it may be a blessing 
that, at the end of the century, some of the starker distinctions 
bred by early immigrant struggles at the beginning of the century 
have grown less keen. Neither the newspaper nor the synagogue has 
established hegemony in America and that is perhaps a good thing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>