<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0426 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Health-maintenance organizations, once thought to be the hope for 
the future of Medicare, said Thursday that they would drop tens of 
thousands of beneficiaries next year, in part because the Clinton 
administration had refused to let them raise premiums or cut prescription-drug 
coverage for the elderly. Spokesmen for the industry said that health 
plans were withdrawing from 300 counties in 18 states because medical 
costs were higher than expected, while Medicare payments were lower 
than anticipated. The White House and the Department of Health and 
Human Services rejected a last-minute lobbying blitz by HMOs, which 
had asked for permission to increase premiums, raise copayments or 
limit certain costly benefits like prescription drugs. Friday is the 
deadline for HMOs to say whether they will participate in Medicare. 
Karen Ignagni, president of the American Association of Health Plans, 
a trade association for the industry, said that ``175,000 to 200,000 
beneficiaries are being dropped'' as a result of decisions already 
made. ``And in the next two days,'' she said, ``we expect a number 
of announcements that will push the total over 250,000 and potentially 
to 300,000.'' Such cutbacks would affect one in 20 Medicare beneficiaries 
now enrolled in HMOs. Consumers dropped from HMOs have two basic options. 
They can go into the traditional fee-for-service Medicare program, 
with or without supplementary insurance to cover extra items. Or they 
can enroll in another HMO if one is available where they live. Advocates 
for the elderly said the turmoil and uncertainty in this market could 
deter people from joining HMOs in the future. Cheryl Matheis, a lobbyist 
for the American Association of Retired Persons, said: ``HMOs have 
left the Medicare market in the past, but far fewer people were affected. 
The knowledge that HMOs can and do leave the program may make people 
a little wary about going into these plans in the future. Beneficiaries 
do not want to be changing health plans every year. They like stability.'' 
Moreover, Ms. Matheis said: ``Many of these beneficiaries will have 
higher out-of-pocket medical costs if they have to buy supplementary 
insurance, and they may not have coverage of prescription drugs.'' 
The association, using government data, said Medicare beneficiaries 
paid an average of $104 a month last year for the supplementary insurance, 
known as Medigap policies. Medigap plans covering drugs often cost 
much more. Diane Archer, executive director of the Medicare Rights 
Center, a consumer group in New York City, said, ``Beneficiaries leaving 
HMOs may be unable to get insurance to fill gaps in the traditional 
Medicare program because of their health, their age, the cost or other 
factors.'' Medicare finances health care for 39 million people who 
are elderly or disabled. About 5.9 million of them are in HMOs, and 
the number has been rising rapidly. But Ms. Ignagni said that Aetna, 
Prudential, Allina, Anthem, Pacificare, Humana, Intermountain Health 
Care and other HMOs were scaling back their Medicare operations. Allina, 
for example, said that it was ending HMO coverage for 10,000 of the 
35,000 people in its Medicare health plans in Minnesota. ``Reimbursement 
rates don't cover our costs,'' said Sarah Stoesz, a spokeswoman for 
Allina. In a similar vein, United Healthcare Corp., based in Minnetonka, 
Minn., said Thursday that it was withdrawing from 86 of the 206 counties 
where it has Medicare health plans, in Colorado, Florida, Texas, Illinois, 
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, among other states. ``That affects 
13 percent of our total Medicare membership _ 59,000 of the company's 
440,000 Medicare beneficiaries,'' said Sue Busch, a spokeswoman for 
United, which has participated in Medicare since 1980. Other Medicare 
HMOs are pulling out of counties in Washington, Oregon, Delaware, 
California, Virginia, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode 
Island and Ohio. HMOs submitted their bids for Medicare business on 
May 1. The government issued new regulations for the program on June 
26. In the last two weeks, HMOs said they should be allowed to revise 
their proposals to account for renewed medical inflation and for the 
cost of complying with the regulations. In a letter Thursday, Nancy-Ann 
Min DeParle, administrator of the Medicare agency, told Ms. Ignagni, 
``We do not believe that your proposal to allow plans to increase 
their premiums and cost-sharing and reduce benefits would be in the 
best interests of our Medicare beneficiaries.'' Thursday's actions 
come after a yearlong battle in which HMOs have resisted President 
Clinton's proposals for new laws to define patients' rights and administration 
officials have repeatedly denounced HMOs. HMOs withdrawing from Medicare 
must notify beneficiaries in writing by Nov. 2. Some patients will 
need to find other doctors. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>