<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The 1996 exhibition ``Converging Cultures: Art and Identity in Spanish 
America'' at the Brooklyn Museum of Art broke important ground in 
the study of the colonial presence in the New World. It demonstrated, 
unforgettably, an alchemical fusion of European and Indian art and 
pointed to many paths of future exploration. One of those leads has 
been been taken up in the ambitious traveling exhibition ``El Alma 
del Pueblo: Spanish Folk Art and Its Transformation in the Americas,'' 
organized by the San Antonio Museum of Art and now installed in the 
adjoining headquarters of the Americas Society and the Spanish Institute 
on Park Avenue. ``El Alma del Pueblo'' (``Soul of the People'') is 
not as closely focused as its predecessor. And at least as installed 
at one of the two New York sites, it is visually far less spectacular. 
But as a survey of Spanish vernacular forms that served as colonial 
models, it fills out the historical picture. And interestingly, it 
makes that picture seem more vivid in the New World than in Spain 
itself. But Spain is where the story begins, and the gathering of 
objects from that country at the Spanish Institute really amounts 
to self-sufficient show. Or more accurately, a sampler with a little 
bit of everything, large and small, from grain chests to chocolate 
cutters, weather vanes to reliquaries. Such diversity causes problems, 
giving the installation as a whole a feeling of thematic drift. But 
many of the individual pieces are fascinating, and together they help 
to define folk art in this context as a merging of function and ornament, 
elite and popular styles, religious and secular impulses. The show 
opens, for example, with pocket-size sets of forks and spoons carved 
by Castilian shepherds from animal horn. They are items of portable 
flatware, nothing more. But each is lovingly embellished with incised 
decorations: a garland of wild roses in one case, in another the figures 
of Adam and Eve standing like tongue-tied teen-agers under a tree. 
Iron kitchen utensils, from sieves to tongs, have a similar plain-spoken 
elegance, and so do the handles, somewhat like those on corkscrews, 
of wooden stamps used to mark bread in communal village ovens. Each 
handle is chiseled and notched with patterns that are inessential 
to actual use but clearly have an important, if less tangible, value. 
Entire social histories can be read in furniture, as designs created 
for an urban elite find their way to the provinces, gaining weight 
and character en route. And evidence of cross-cultural exchange is 
everywhere. A Spanish lusterware bowl has roots in Islamic North Africa; 
a 14th-century wooden Virgin trails her French pedigree like perfume; 
an 18th-century cherub, with outstretched cheerleader's arms, seems 
proud to be a homeboy version of suave Italian prototypes. Here and 
there, sacred and profane identities blend. A bit of bright fabric 
with a scalloped lace trim looks like a fancy sachet; it's actually 
an infant's christening cap. A splashy bridal corsage made of ribbons 
carried a saint's relic. Two lifelike wooden puppet heads from Cataluna, 
replete with human hair, look like Punch and Judy types, but were 
used to dramatize Bible stories. The material amassed at the Spanish 
Institute, in galleries on two floors, is full of information _ but 
almost too much, or at least too varied in kind, for any coherent 
picture of a culture to emerge. In the end, the ideas and pleasures 
remain episodic, with much of the work left to sink or swim, little 
helped by the bland installation. The situation is different at the 
Americas Society, where colonial art predominates; there the show 
springs to life. In part, this is because of an atmospheric display, 
and a honing down of materials: A single vitrine of shrewdly chosen 
ceramics catches the dynamic of colonial encounters in a stroke. But 
more important, the story told here of two worlds meeting has an intrinsic 
compare-and-contrast logic that the curator, Marion Oettinger Jr., 
brilliantly exploits. One sees it as one goes through the gallery 
door, in two 19th-century wooden images of the Virgin _ one from Spain, 
the other from Bolivia. The bodies are rudimentary; they were meant 
to be swathed in robes. But the heads are carefully modeled. The face 
of the Spanish image has the milky skin and rapt expression of a Murillo 
Madonna; that on the Bolivian figure, appearing above a massive neck, 
has slightly darker skin and emphatic Frida Kahlo eyebrows. Such differences 
may only reflect the preferences of individual artists. And there 
is plenty of evidence on hand of art apparently little changed in 
being transplanted. This seems to be the case in the selection of 
votive paintings, images commissioned in gratitude for crises averted. 
One depicts a woman recuperating from childbirth in her Spanish bedroom; 
another a sailor pulled from the Gulf of Mexico by the Virgin of Guadalupe. 
In both, the format and you-are-there illustrational approach are 
much the same. But elsewhere, a New World context is unmistakably 
announced. Figures in a Peruvian painting of the Adoration of the 
Magi wear Andean ponchos and hats. A rose-bedecked Madonna in an 18th-century 
Mexican icon stands in a fishing canoe. St. Isidore the Farmer, patron 
of Madrid, Spain, is awarded his own hacienda in a Bolivian painting. 
The genuflecting bull in a carved 20th-century shrine of the Virgin 
of Montserrat from Puerto Rico refers to a miracle that only Caribbean 
locals would know. Finally, certain works stand out as virtual lexicons 
of the truly global culture that developed in colonial America within 
a matter of decades after European contact. An earthenware platter 
from Mexico uses a Spanish-Islamic glaze technique; the abstract designs 
on its rim have Aztec and Mixtec origins; the ``willow pattern'' landscape 
painted at its center is borrowed from English versions of Chinese 
exportware. This multicultural marvel, like the Puerto Rican Virgin 
and many other objects in the show, is of fairly recent date, made 
around 1900 by the Mexican potter Miguel Martinez. Even work by contemporary 
Latino artists in New York _ Cecilia Vicuna, Antonio Martorell, Manuel 
Vega _ whose work is, in some essential way, craft-based, would make 
perfect sense in this context. Traditions born in Spain and carried 
westward five centuries ago are still in the process of transformation 
in this city, and wherever the soul of the people lives. ``El Alma 
del Pueblo: Spanish Folk Art and its Transformation in the Americas'' 
remains at The Americas Society, 680 Park Ave., New York, and at The 
Spanish Institute, 684 Park Ave., through Dec. 31. The exhibition 
travels to the Chicago Cultural Center, to the Crocker Art Museum 
in Sacramento, Calif., and to the San Diego Museum of Art. It is supported 
by Ford Motor Co. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>