<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It wasn't so long ago that love, in Hollywood-speak, was supposed 
to mean ``never having to say you're sorry.'' ``What Dreams May Come,'' 
one of the most elaborate metaphysical love stories ever tackled by 
Hollywood, lays out a whole new set of irritating catch phrases to 
define the quest for a love that triumphs over death. These range 
from the blunt ``Never give up,'' which is repeated like a mantra 
throughout the movie, to portentous utterances about winning when 
you lose and losing when you win. ``What Dreams May Come,'' based 
on a novel by Richard Matheson and directed by Vincent Ward, the New 
Zealand filmmaker noted for his skill at creating lavish cinematic 
dreamscapes, represents the uncomfortable collision of two ideas about 
filmmaking, one commercial, the other eccentrically, ambitiously dreamy. 
On the commercial level, it is an ecumenically canny exercise in pop 
inspiration that's smart enough to drop the name ``God'' only once, 
in a vague, nondogmatic reference. The story of the world's happiest 
couple, who after both dying tragic deaths meet again in the afterlife, 
wants to be a more grown-up, sophisticated ``Ghost.'' This feel-good 
allegory, chock-full of celestial special effects and sentimental 
reunions, comes with an uplifting triple-decker finale in the manner 
of ``Titanic.'' Robin Williams, with his Humpty Dumpty grin and crinkly 
moist eyes dripping with empathy, is Chris Nielsen, a gifted pediatrician, 
doting husband and father of two, who, in a feat of metaphysical heroism, 
travels into the netherworld to rescue his wife and soul mate, Annie 
(Annabella Sciorra), from eternal damnation. Annie is a painter and 
museum worker who commits suicide (and is condemned to live in hell 
for taking her own life) after Chris is killed in a car accident. 
Four years earlier, the couple's two children, Marie (Jessica Brooks 
Grant) and Ian (Josh Paddock), also died in a car wreck that left 
both parents shattered. At that terrible moment, Chris' devotion pulled 
Annie out of a near-suicidal depression. Working from a screenplay 
by Ron Bass, Ward has created a film that at its most visually evocative 
portrays its characters' lives and afterlives as a kind of hall of 
mirrors, in which the lines between dream and reality, memory and 
eternity are continually blurring as one gives way to another. At 
its most seductive, the film portrays heaven as a magical, hallucinatory 
extension of the physical world that has been left behind. It is a 
place flooded with dim golden light and thick with flowers, of misty 
peaks and crags, where people and objects float through the sky and 
great distances can be breached with a single leap (of faith, of course). 
When Chris first arrives in heaven, he finds himself inside one of 
Annie's Gothic romantic paintings. After crunching down in a flower 
bed, he gets up to find himself covered with paint, as though he had 
landed on a just-completed three-dimensional Renoir canvas that was 
still wet. The underworld he visits with the help of a grim-faced 
guide played by (who else?) Max von Sydow is a grim but PG-13-looking 
place (when it comes to punishment and suffering) surrounded by burning 
shipwrecks. In the most powerful image of hell, one that is intensely 
claustrophobic, Chris is forced to run across a sea of muttering heads 
all craning up through an endless expanse of mud. But for all their 
visual fascination, these images don't seem connected to real people. 
Bass' screenplay is so clotted with slogans, riddles and dime-store 
psychobabble that Chris and Annie never coalesce into anything more 
than a pair of idealized greeting-card parents with terrible luck. 
The movie doesn't give them enough earthly screen time for us to get 
to know them. Brief flashbacks find Chris arguing with his son about 
school, but they try to cram too much information into too small a 
space for the relationship to develop any substance. And all the weeping 
and hugging the characters do can't make up for the film's fatal lack 
of texture and psychological nuance. Cuba Gooding Jr. is glaringly 
miscast as an angel who guides Chris through his first days in heaven 
and who turns out to be _ well, you'll have to see the movie to find 
out. It's often been said that baby boomers think they can live forever. 
``What Dreams May Come'' is the movie that tells them, yes, it's possible, 
at least in a solipsistic New Age sense, to attain eternal life. That's 
because eternity, the movie soothingly suggests, is whatever you imagine 
it to be. If you can conjure it up, then on some level it must be 
reality. Just like ``Peter Pan.'' Close your eyes, snap your fingers 
and you can fly. PRODUCTION NOTES WHAT DREAMS MAY COME Rating: ``What 
Dreams May Come'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It 
deals with an uncomfortable subject (death) and has scary images of 
hell. Directed by Vincent Ward; written by Ron Bass, based on the 
novel by Richard Matheson; director of photography, Eduardo Serra; 
edited by David Brenner and Maysie Hoy; music by Michael Kamen; production 
designer, Eugenio Zanetti; produced by Stephen Simon and Barnet Bain; 
released by Polygram Filmed Entertainment. Running time: 106 minutes. 
This film is rated PG-13. Cast: Robin Williams (Chris Nielsen), Cuba 
Gooding Jr. (Albert), Annabella Sciorra (Annie Nielsen), Max von Sydow 
(the Tracker), Jessica Brooks Grant (Marie Nielsen) and Josh Paddock 
(Ian Nielsen). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>