<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kerry James Marshall, an artist based in Chicago, has described his 
work as history painting, and he has taken black life in America as 
his primary subject. In the large-scale pieces he contributed to last 
year's Whitney Biennial, black children played in housing projects 
that resembled those he had lived in during the 1960s in Los Angeles. 
The settings were carefully detailed, but surreal. Urban buildings 
had the look of American-dream suburbs. Hallmark card sunrises and 
bluebirds filled the skies. But parts of the pictures were obliterated 
with smeared paint. The emotional tone was complicated, at once sentimental 
and tough, mixing affection and reproach. It was as if each picture 
had started out as a fond, idealized depiction of a life remembered, 
then gradually turned into a disillusioned statement of a life denied. 
In ``Kerry James Marshall: Mementos'' at the Brooklyn Museum of Art, 
these complexities deepen, formally and conceptually. For his first 
museum solo, the artist has moved into multimedia installation and 
has tackled the huge, and hugely conflicted topic of the civil rights 
struggles of the 1950s and '60s. As always with his work, history 
is both social narrative and personal experience. Marshall was born 
in Birmingham, Ala., in 1955, the year the bus boycott began. He was 
a child there when the 16th Street Baptist Church was bombed, killing 
four girls, and when George Wallace prevented black students from 
entering the University of Alabama. He lived in Los Angeles during 
the Watts riots and the shootout between the Black Panthers and the 
police. And all of these events were played out against the deaths 
of President John F. Kennedy, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. 
and Sen. Robert F. Kennedy, national catastrophes that charged an 
era with a mood of anger and grief. The Brooklyn installation, organized 
by the Renaissance Society at the University of Chicago, opens on 
a funerary note with a bannerlike commemorative painting. On a solid 
black field framed by a decorative border of gold glitter appear the 
portraits of the three dead leaders, accompanied by the words ``We 
Mourn Our Loss'' in Gothic script. Similar pieces recur throughout 
the show, though no two are exactly alike. A portrait of Malcolm X 
is inserted in one. Another turns into a tribute to the artist's father. 
In a third, iconic faces are blotted out by a swipe of paint. Each 
panel also incorporates handwritten words in pencil and ballpoint 
pen _ Bible quotations, personal names, the initials of political 
groups _ like entries in a funeral parlor guest book or graffiti on 
a wall, history inscribed by whoever is passing through. Words play 
an important role in Marshall's work. They appear in all of his paintings 
and they are the only images in a recent series of prints of civil 
rights era political slogans. They range from the pacifist anthem 
``We Shall Overcome'' to the militant ``Burn, baby, burn'' and together 
chart the shifting political mood of a decade. Marshall created the 
prints with five-foot-high handstamps, and these appear in the show, 
like abstract sculptures, along with outsize ink pads in red, green 
and black, the colors of black nationalism. Also included is a series 
of four paintings, each titled ``Souvenir,'' in the artist's signature 
format _ mural size, on unstretched canvas _ and they are extraordinary. 
In each, an orderly living room, carefully observed in every detail, 
is occupied by a middle-aged black woman. The scenes look straightforward 
enough except that the woman has angel's wings and is accompanied 
by apparitional presences. In one painting, the faces of black musicians 
from the past float above her head; in another, the names of artists 
and writers who died in the 1960s: Zora Neale Hurston, Augusta Savage, 
Lorraine Hansberry and Bob Thompson among them. In a third, the ghostly 
portraits of Black Panthers and the four girls who died in the Birmingham 
church hover on high. The title of the exhibition's centerpiece video 
work, ``Laid to Rest,'' seems to promise a resolution to the paintings' 
mix of regret and celebration. The film, which can be viewed only 
through eyeholes cut in the side of a wood enclosure painted as a 
mock-mausoleum, shows a wake in progress with an open coffin banked 
by flowers. But the atmosphere is agitated. Animated images flash 
by in a quick-cut sequence over the bier, accompanied by an aggressive 
soundtrack of couples battling and drug deals being made. And over 
the coffin, above where the head would be, a pair of Lincoln pennies, 
intended to close the eyes of the corpse, spin in midair. The image 
can have several meanings. Many of the problems addressed by the civil 
rights movement have not died; nor have the movement's heroic ghosts 
found repose, despite being enshrined in history books. The work they 
initiated needs to be advanced, just as the outsize handstamps, with 
their exhortations to action, need to be put to use. They are being 
used, of course; the prints Marshall has included in the installation 
attest to that. And political changes stemming from the civil rights 
era are in progress, though often in subtle and oblique forms. Such 
changes are suggested in a group of small paintings that are not part 
of the installation, but hang in a gallery nearby. Each is a three-quarter-length 
portrait of a single black sitter dressed in a traditional American 
scouting uniform. A Boy Scout in regulation beige looks out at the 
viewer, his head surrounded by a fiery halo. A Cub Scout den mother 
with close-cropped hair wears small gold rings in her nose and ears. 
A scoutmaster has an American flag stitched on his sleeve and his 
hand clenched in a fist. Here, Marshall's complex historical perspective 
is distilled. In these portraits, time-honored American values _ community, 
leadership, duty _ that were also the bedrock of the early civil rights 
movement, are reconfirmed and radically recast. The scout figures 
wear familiar uniforms, but with a difference: as militant citizens 
claiming a place in the mainstream but sustaining a revolution within. 
It's a difficult position to negotiate, but a powerful one, and it 
seems to form the foundation for much of this challenging artist's 
work. ``Kerry James Marshall: Mementos'' remains at the Brooklyn Museum 
of Art, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, through Nov. 29. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>