<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from testimony by Alan Greenspan before the 
House banking panel: Had the failure of LTCM triggered the seizing 
up of markets, substantial damage could have been inflicted on many 
market participants, including some not directly involved with the 
firm, and could have potentially impaired the economies of many nations, 
including our own. With credit spreads already elevated and the market 
prices of risky assets under considerable downward pressure, Federal 
Reserve officials moved more quickly to provide their good offices 
to help resolve the affairs of LTCM than would have been the case 
in more normal times. In effect, the threshold of action was lowered 
by the knowledge that markets had recently become fragile. Moreover, 
our sense was that the consequences of a fire sale triggered by cross-default 
clauses, should LTCM fail on some of its obligations, risked a severe 
drying up of market liquidity. The plight of LTCM might scarcely have 
caused a ripple in financial markets or among federal regulators 18 
months ago _ but in current circumstances it was judged to warrant 
attention. ... Quickly unwinding a complicated portfolio that contains 
exposure to all manner of risks, such as that of LTCM, in such market 
conditions amounts to conducting a fire sale. The prices received 
in a time of stress do not reflect longer-run potential, adding to 
the losses incurred. Of course, a fire sale that transfers wealth 
from one set of sophisticated market players to another, without any 
impact on the financial system over all, should not be a concern for 
the central bank. Moreover, creditors should reasonably be expected 
to put some weight on the possibility of a large market swing when 
making their risk assessments. Indeed, when we examine banks we expect 
them to have systems in place that take account of outsized market 
moves. However, a fire sale may be sufficiently intense and widespread 
that it seriously distorts markets and elevates uncertainty enough 
to impair the overall functioning of the economy. Sophisticated economic 
systems cannot thrive in such an atmosphere. ... On Sept. 23, the 
private sector parties arrived at an agreement providing a capital 
infusion of about $3.5 billion in return for substantially diluting 
existing shareholders' stake in LTCM. Control of the firm passed from 
the current management to a committee determined from the outside 
by the new investors. Those investors intend to shrink LTCM's portfolio 
so as to reduce risk of loss and return the remaining capital to the 
investors as soon as practicable. I do not rule out the possibility 
that the new owners of what is left of LTCM may decide to keep part 
of it in business. That is their judgment to make. This agreement 
was not a Government bailout, in that Federal Reserve funds were neither 
provided nor ever even suggested. Agreements were not forced upon 
unwilling market participants. Creditors and counterparties calculated 
that LTCM and, accordingly, their claims, would be worth more over 
time if the liquidation of LTCM's portfolio was orderly as opposed 
to being subject to a fire sale. And with markets currently volatile 
and investors skittish, putting a special premium on the timely resolution 
of LTCM's problems seemed entirely appropriate as a matter of public 
policy. ... It is questionable whether hedge funds can be effectively 
directly regulated in the United States alone. While their financial 
clout may be large, hedge funds' physical presence is small. Given 
the amazing communication capabilities available virtually around 
the globe, trades can be initiated from almost any location. Indeed, 
most hedge funds are only a short step from cyberspace. Any direct 
U.S. regulations restricting their flexibility will doubtless induce 
the more aggressive funds to emigrate from under our jurisdiction. 
The best we can do in my judgment is what we do today: Regulate them 
indirectly through the regulation of the sources of their funds. ... 
For so long as there have been financial markets, participants have 
had on occasion to weigh the costs and, especially, the externalities 
associated with fire-sale liquidations of troubled entities against 
short-term assistance to tide the firms over for a time. It was such 
a balancing of near-term costs and longer-term benefits that presumably 
led J.P. Morgan to convene the leading bankers of his age _ both commercial 
and investment _ in his library in 1907 to address the severe panic 
of that year. Such episodes were recognized as among those rare occasions 
when otherwise highly effective markets seize up and temporary ad 
hoc responses were required. The convening of LTCM investors and lenders 
last week at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York could be viewed 
in that long tradition. It should similarly be viewed as a rare occasion, 
warranted because of the potential for serious disruptions to markets. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>