<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0502 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Russia went into a tailspin earlier this year, Poland's stock 
market crashed. Investors pulled $1 billion in short-term capital 
out of the country and prepared for Poland to descend into the maelstrom. 
Yet the panic that threatened to upset Eastern Europe's largest economy, 
and most notable success story, appears at the moment to have receded. 
Russia remains in distress, but Poland is moving forward. Last week, 
the stock market sprang back 6.2 percent and the currency, the zloty, 
has gained against major currencies like the dollar and the mark. 
(On Thursday, the stock market fell 6.74 percent as shares fell sharply 
in many countries, but it is up 4.8 percent over the last month.) 
Earlier this month, as if to demonstrate its confidence to a world 
hanging on every shift in mood and perception, the National Bank of 
Poland, the central bank, trimmed its key lending rate to 18 percent 
from 19 percent. Boguslaw Grabowski, a member of the central bank's 
monetary policy council, which oversees the currency, described the 
zloty's recent volatility as ``its biggest test ever'' and said that 
``the exam was passed excellently, without intervention from the National 
Bank.'' The volume of short-term capital flight, he said in an interview, 
was about $1 billion of a total $4.5 billion in short-term capital 
invested in the country, and the central bank has been heartened by 
a gradual revival of capital flows to Poland. As an important engine 
for growth in the region, Poland's success has eased the fear that 
the crisis in Russia could spill over to its smaller neighbors to 
the west, which are still struggling to overhaul their economies after 
decades of communist mismanagement. ``The zloty has fared remarkably 
well,'' said Krzysztof Sidor, head of research at the Pioneer investment 
fund in Poland. Outflows of capital, he said, have been largely a 
result of investors ``taking profit in Poland to cover Russia.'' Still, 
Poland is not home free. The economy's resilience can in large measure 
be attributed to its success in hooking itself to the locomotive of 
Western Europe, and an expected slowdown there could weaken Poland 
further. The European Union accounts for about 70 percent of Polish 
trade, roughly the share that went to the Soviet Union and its allies 
before communism collapsed in 1989, and the United States is the top 
source of foreign direct investment, which in the first half of this 
year totaled more than $5 billion. Pierre Bergeron, head of research 
for Citibank in Warsaw, described Poland's economy as a ``rail car 
attached to the high-speed European train.'' But Western Europe's 
train is fast losing steam as a result of the crisis in emerging markets 
and the slowing growth in the United States. Earlier this month, Bergeron 
modestly trimmed his Polish growth estimate for next year to 4.6 percent, 
from an earlier forecast of 5.8 percent. The central bank still expects 
growth of 5.4 percent to 5.5 percent, but with economies slowing in 
Western Europe, Poland cannot escape the effects, he said. Much of 
Poland's success has been a result of large injections of foreign 
direct investment, which this year reached $20.6 billion, pushing 
Poland past Hungary as the region's biggest recipient since 1989. 
But with corporate profits under pressure in the United States and 
Western Europe, where most of that capital originates, the flow of 
money to Poland could dwindle. While 65 percent of jobs in the economy 
are now in the private sector, large chunks of business remain to 
be privatized, including Telekomunikacja Polska, the phone company, 
which the government plans to bring to the stock exchange in November. 
Moreover, heavily indebted branches of the nationalized economy, like 
health care and the coal and steel industries, continue to weigh heavily 
on the government budget. A selloff of nationalized assets, given 
wildly gyrating world stock markets, will prove difficult. What calms 
investors, however, is the fact that Poland has sound financial accounts, 
bolstered by an economy that is proving remarkably resilient. Though 
Poland's official trade with Russia accounts for only 8 percent of 
the total, it is supplemented by a vigorous cross-border trade, often 
based on barter, that adds about $500 million a month to Poland's 
export earnings. Thus far, that trade has not collapsed. From January 
to July, Poland's total exports, which rose 20 percent from 1997 levels, 
outstripped imports, which rose by 15 percent, pushing the current 
account deficit down to $2.6 billion, from $3 billion in 1997. Even 
as capital gushed out of emerging markets from Indonesia to Russia 
and Brazil, Poland's currency reserves steadily rose to $27.5 billion 
from $24.3 billion in June, before Russia's troubles began. ``They're 
by far the best of a weaker bunch,'' Bergeron of Citibank said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>