<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0392 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An El Al cargo plane that crashed in Amsterdam six years ago was carrying 
a chemical that can be used in the manufacture of the deadly nerve 
gas Sarin, a spokesman for the Israeli national airline acknowledged 
on Thursday. But a spokesman for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
said that the chemical was not toxic and had been ordered by Israel 
to test gas masks and other filters designed to protect against chemical 
agents. The Israeli Defense Ministry said that the plane carried no 
``dangerous goods'' for the ministry. The El Al spokesman, Nachman 
Klieman, confirmed a report in a Dutch newspaper that the plane had 
carried the chemical, but he declined to say anything about its possible 
use. ``I can't comment on what its ultimate purpose was,'' Klieman 
said. ``We fly sugar, which can be used for cake, but that doesn't 
mean we're flying a cake.'' Israel has never acknowledged production 
of chemical or biological weapons, just as Israeli officials have 
been deliberately ambiguous about the country's reported nuclear capability. 
An El Al Boeing 747-200F crashed into an apartment complex in Amsterdam 
on Oct. 4, 1992, killing 43 people. Since then, scores of people living 
in the area have complained of unidentified health problems, including 
respiratory and skin ailments. An investigation determined the mechanical 
cause of the crash, but a full list of the plane's cargo was not made 
public by the Israeli authorities. After several investigations and 
persistent speculation in the Netherlands about the nature of the 
freight, the Dutch Parliament announced last week that it would begin 
an inquiry into the accident. The Dutch newspaper NRC Handelsblad 
reported on Wednesday that the plane was carrying about 50 gallons 
of dimethyl methylphosphonate, which the paper said was enough to 
produce 594 pounds of sarin. The chemical is also used as a flame 
retardant in building materials. The newspaper printed a copy of what 
it said was a freight document showing that the material came from 
Solkatronic Chemicals Inc. in Morrisville, Pa., and was sent to the 
Institute for Biological Research in the Israeli town of Ness Ziona, 
south of Tel Aviv. The institute's work is a closely guarded secret 
in Israel. The Dutch paper said that three of the four main components 
needed for the production of sarin were on the El Al plane, and that 
it was unclear whether the burning of the chemicals had contributed 
to health problems experienced by people living in the area of the 
crash. Neither the spokesman for El Al or for Netanyahu mentioned 
the presence of other chemicals on the plane. The spokesman for Netanyahu, 
Aviv Bushinsky, said that the Institute for Biological Research had 
ordered about 50 gallons of dimethyl methylphosphonate ``for testing 
of filters, including protective filters'' with the approval of the 
U.S. Department of Commerce. After the shipment was lost in the crash, 
another was delivered, Bushinsky said. ``It should be emphasized that 
the material is not poisonous and is used in various industrial applications,'' 
Bushinsky added. Dan Weinreich, spokesman for the Israeli Defense 
Ministry, said in a written statement that all documents listing cargo 
sent to the ministry had been submitted to the Dutch authorities. 
``The freight consigned to the Ministry of Defense on board flight 
LY1862 did not contain dangerous goods, therefore no grounds for concern 
exist,'' Weinreich said. ``It should be noted that this statement 
pertains only to cargo consigned to the Ministry of Defense.'' A statement 
by El Al said that the chemical mentioned in the Dutch report had 
been approved for air transport by the International Air Transport 
Association, the International Civil Aviation Association and the 
United Nations. ``El Al has never hidden any facts or details regarding 
cargo flown on the flight in question, and has always provided full 
cooperation with the appropriate Dutch authorities,'' El Al said. 
Klieman said that El Al routinely carried a variety of substances 
whose transport is permitted by international aviation agencies. At 
the time of the crash, he said, it was disclosed that the El Al plane 
carried military spare parts and perfume, but reporters' queries about 
other items were referred to the Dutch authorities. The Dutch Foreign 
Ministry said it knew of chemicals on the plane, Agence France-Presse 
reported, saying the document cited by the newspaper was included 
in a report to the Dutch Parliament in 1996. Israel signed the Chemical 
Weapons Convention in January 1993, but it has not been ratified by 
the Israeli Cabinet. Ratification would give the signature practical 
effect, requiring Israel to declare chemical weapons it may have held 
in the past, to destroy any weapons it might currently hold, and to 
allow inspection of suspected weapons production sites. The convention 
was recently ratified by Iran, but it has not been signed by Syria, 
Egypt, Iraq and Libya, on the ground that Israel should first sign 
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>