<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0034 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
About 100 letters addressing Andy Pettitte's slump have landed in 
the locker of Mel Stottlemyre, the New York Yankees' pitching coach. 
Stottlemyre reads them all and dismisses them all, believing Pettitte 
has always possessed his own antidote. A chronic self-doubter who 
slumped in the last two months of the regular season, Pettitte finally 
ignored the pressure he usually inflicts on himself. He concentrated 
solely on the glove of his catcher Wednesday night and pitched seven 
strong innings as the Yankees defeated the Texas Rangers, 3-1, in 
Game 2 of the American League division series at Yankee Stadium. ``He's 
got a belly full of guts,'' Manager Joe Torre said of Pettitte. And 
so it goes for the Yankees: The juggernaut is one victory away from 
sweeping the first-round series in three games. David Cone will pitch 
Game 3 on Friday night, in Texas, against the Rangers' Aaron Sele. 
The rookie Shane Spencer, a late insertion into Yankees' lineup as 
the No. 7 hitter, hammered a home run last night and Scott Brosius, 
batting eighth, slammed a two-run shot, spurring the crowd of 57,360. 
The bottom third of the Yankee lineup has batted .529 in accounting 
for all five runs in the first two games. The Rangers, who led the 
American League in hitting during the regular season, have mustered 
only 10 hits and a walk in the first two games of the series, the 
apparent victims of perceptive advance scouting by the Yankees that 
aided David Wells in Game 1 and Pettitte on Wednesday night. Pettitte 
often talks to himself on the mound, his catcher Joe Girardi has said, 
in words of self-criticism understood only by Pettitte himself. But 
the constant harping drove him into a slump in August, and it wasn't 
until the season's final week that Pettitte emerged from his funk 
_ at about the same time Torre told Pettitte he would be part of the 
team's post-season rotation, which seemed to give the left-hander 
peace of mind. ``It feels great,'' Pettitte said on Wednesday night, 
``because obviously there were a lot of people questioning Joe for 
starting me in Game 2.'' Even as Pettitte warmed up for Wednesday 
night's game, Stottlemyre felt Pettitte was much different, much more 
confident, in deep concentration. Once on the mound, Pettitte seemed 
to be communicating only with Girardi's glove; see the glove, hit 
the glove. Before each pitch, he stood at the top of the mound, staring 
at the ground, a moment of mental preparation before staring in for 
Girardi's sign. Girardi would signal and, like a robot, Pettitte would 
draw his hands in front of him, his eyes locked on Girardi's glove. 
``His focus,'' Stottlemyre said, ``was as good as it can get.'' Pettitte 
had the advantage of knowing that the Yankees' scouting report on 
the Rangers _ compiled by a team of seven scouts _ seemed to be right 
on the mark. He watched in Game 1 as Wells, his fellow left-hander, 
constantly got ahead on the count by throwing a first-pitch strike, 
then used the aggressive approach of the Rangers' hitters against 
them. The Rangers would look for hard stuff and swing hard, but Wells 
would throw changeups, and the Texas batters would flail at pitches 
out of the strike zone. ``I learned a lot,'' Pettitte said. He took 
the same tack as Wells. He threw strikes, got ahead in the count with 
sinking fastballs, then went to his off-speed pitch. Girardi estimated 
that of the 94 pitches Pettitte threw, 25 were changeups. Pettitte 
usually likes to pitch inside to right-handed batters, but on Wednesday 
night he stayed outside, and the Rangers never adjusted. The first 
three Texas batters grounded out. Pettitte needed only eight pitches 
in the first inning, his confidence growing. The Rangers went down 
in order in the second inning, again in the third, and so on. He retired 
the first 12 batters before allowing the first Texas hit. During 32 
starts in the regular season, Pettitte never retired more than 11 
batters consecutively. On Wednesday night, he threw only 44 pitches 
in the first four innings, in direct contrast to the Rangers' starter, 
Rick Helling. Muhammad Ali invented the the rope-a-dope boxing style. 
Lay back, take your opponent's best shots, let him tire himself out 
_ and then pounce. The Yankee hitters have been playing rope-a-dope 
against opposing starters all season, patiently taking pitches, waiting 
out walks, reaching to foul off two-strike fastballs and breaking 
balls. Helling needed 91 pitches in the first four innings on Wednesday 
night _ and then the Yankees pounced. Spencer put the Yankees up in 
the second inning, smashing a thigh-high fastball over the left-center 
field wall, beyond the 399-foot sign. It was his eighth home run in 
28 at-bats, dating to the last days of the regular season. He returned 
to the dugout grinning broadly, but the crowd would not let him sit 
until he acknowledged the cheers once more. Spencer emerged with a 
practiced and exulted wave. On his next at-bat, with one out in the 
fourth inning, Spencer skipped a hard grounder through the middle. 
Brosius then launched Helling's 79th pitch of the game beyond the 
fence in right field, a two-run shot. The Rangers scored their first 
run of the series in the fifth inning. Juan Gonzalez pulled a grounder 
down the third-base line for a double, tagged up and moved to third 
on a fly ball, then scored on Ivan Rodriguez's line single. Ramiro 
Mendoza began warming in the Yankee bullpen, a strong indication that 
despite Torre's confident public backing of Pettitte, the manager 
was prepared to pull him immediately, rather than permit the left-hander 
any margin for error. But Pettitte finished off the fifth by retiring 
Todd Zeile and Mike Simms _ the turning point of his outing, he said 
later. Pettitte then struck out three in the sixth inning, Girardi 
encouraging him along the way, pointing at him every time Pettitte 
made a good pitch. Pettitte retired the Rangers in order in the seventh, 
and his night was over. He had allowed three hits in seven innings, 
no walks, eight strikeouts. Pettitte smiled widely afterward. This 
is what he needed, and Stottlemyre has known it all along. ``This 
is really important for us,'' Stottlemyre said, ``because we're going 
to rely on him as one of our main pitchers the rest of the way.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>