<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0339 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Each year, the auto manufacturers proclaim their new cars can do more 
than any they have produced in the past. But can they boast of offering 
a car that flies? This year, the centerpiece of the Louis Vuitton 
Classic at Rockefeller Center is the 1949 Airphibian, a car that 49 
years ago was as at home on the highway as it was cruising 2,400 feet 
high in the sky. The third annual Louis Vuitton Classic, which begins 
Friday and continues through Sunday, transforms Rockefeller Center 
into a showplace for extraordinary automobiles. While the Airphibian 
may be the only car that actually takes to the air, a goal of the 
Vuitton Classic, according to chief judge Murray Livingstone Smith, 
is to ``present an array of cars that are visually stimulating, and 
that will cause the imagination of the viewers to take flight as well.'' 
The Airphibian is one of five cars that will be displayed in Rockefeller 
Center's Channel Gardens as part of ``Flights of Imagination'' _ the 
theme of this year's event. Unlike the other 51 classic cars on display 
that compete for Best of Class and the Best of Show awards, the theme 
cars are not judged in concours d'elegance, or a competition of elegance, 
as these shows are known. Each theme car was selected because it represented 
the passion of individual creators. While most such competitions are 
presented on immaculately groomed golf courses, and have admission 
fees as high as $50 a person, the Louis Vuitton Classic ``is the only 
major one in the world that takes place right in the heart of a city, 
has no admission fee and closes down the streets,'' Smith said. The 
event is underwritten by Louis Vuitton North America, a unit of LVMH 
Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton. Last year, according to police estimates, 
more than 2.3 million people passed through the exhibition, Smith 
said. And while New York City is not often regarded as a hotbed of 
sports and classic car enthusiasts, Smith said, ``we have been overwhelmed 
by positive comments.'' ``Just because New Yorkers don't get to see 
cars like this very often doesn't mean that they aren't attracted 
to them,'' Smith said. ``It's like we are bringing a museum full of 
cars and putting them onto the streets, their natural environment, 
where everyone can enjoy them.'' The man behind the featured car, 
the Airphibian, Robert Edison Fulton Jr. of Danbury, Conn., in 1940 
created the world's first flight simulator. The Gunairstructor, as 
it was called, helped teach pilots how to shoot down enemy planes. 
He sold $6 million worth to the U.S. military. While traveling across 
the country by private plane to teach instructors to use his device, 
he was often stranded at local airports without a car, in those days 
before rental cars. His solution was the Airphibian, reportedly the 
world's first aircraft capable of flying as well as driving down the 
highway. According to a July 1952 test in Popular Science magazine, 
the Airphibian was capable of cruising at 110 miles an hour in the 
air and traveling 50 mph on the ground, and getting 20 miles to the 
gallon. After extensive testing, in 1950 the Civil Aeronautics Administration 
granted the Airphibian its aircraft certificate, and orders for 10 
planes at $7,500 each were received. Demonstrating that greedy investors 
and a desire for quick return on capital are not a phenomenon of the 
'90s alone, Fulton's financial backers began to quarrel, then tried 
to sell the Airphibian to General Motors. Finally, after Fulton's 
withdrawal from the project, the investors let the entire endeavor 
dissolve in disarray. Airphibian Co. donated a single example to the 
Smithsonian Institution in 1959, where it has since been stored. It 
is this Airphibian that has been restored and will make its public 
debut at the Vuitton event before going back to the Smithsonian. The 
four other theme cars include the 1938 Phantom Corsair, built by Russ 
Heinz, then 23, of the Heinz 57 Varieties family. Designed to be a 
``car of the future,'' its wildly aerodynamic styling resembles a 
cross between a horseshoe crab and a manta ray. Another theme car, 
the 1952 So-Cal Special, had its genesis in 1940s race cars that were 
built out of teardrop-shaped 315-gallon auxiliary fuel tanks from 
World War II P-38 combat airplanes. Known as ``Lakesters'' and ``Streamliners,'' 
they were raced at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah, among other 
places. In 1952, drawing on new aircraft technology, the So-Cal Special 
was built in the style of the ``Streamliners'' and immediately set 
five speed records at the Salt Flats. Although Buckminster Fuller 
is best known as the man behind the geodesic dome, in 1933 he invented 
the Dymaxion, a futuristic, teardrop-shaped, three-wheeled, aluminum-bodied 
vehicle that is also a theme car this year. Less than 20 feet long, 
it seats a driver plus 10 passengers. The inventor said the Dymaxion 
was capable of 120 mph with a 90-horsepower engine and got 50 miles 
to the gallon. The final theme car is from the modern era, a retro 
hot rod designed by Boyd Coddington, one of America's premier hot 
rod builders. Despite its visual homage to the past, the 1994 Aluma 
Coupe is a high-technology car with a polished aluminum skin that 
looks like yellow glass. Television host David Letterman has entered 
his 1951 Ferrari 212 EL Inter Coupe, the twin of a 212 once owned 
by King Farouk of Egypt in the Rare Road Cars class. ``When I purchased 
the 212 it was several boxes of parts,'' Letterman said through his 
publicity representative. The assembly of the car was entrusted to 
a Ferrari expert, Francois Sicard. ``Francois Sicard did a lovely 
job reconstructing it,'' Letterman said. ``I believe it is the homeliest 
Ferrari ever made. I drove it once and melted the clutch. Francois 
won't let me near it anymore.'' Prewar touring and grand touring cars 
make up the True Greats class. Included is a 1931 Bugatti Type 41 
Royale Coupe de Ville, which cost $42,000 when new, making it the 
most expensive production vehicle of its time, with a current market 
value of more than $10 million, according to Don Williams, a vintage 
car expert. One of six built, the Royale has a 788-cubic-inch engine, 
is nearly 20 feet in length, almost 2 feet longer than today's Chevrolet 
Suburban. The marriage of a 1931 Rolls-Royce with an airplane engine 
from a World War II Spitfire resulted in a one-of-a-kind automobile, 
which is in the same class of the Royale. The size of the engine, 
also built by Rolls-Royce, at 27 liters, is five times the size of 
a standard American V8. As this is the 50th anniversary of the founding 
of the car builder Porsche, a single class is devoted entirely to 
the sports and racing cars from Stuttgart, Germany. The 1958 Speedster 
in the group, owned by Chad McQueen, was originally delivered to his 
father, the actor Steve McQueen. The judges are a cross section of 
automotive experts, including David E. Davis, founder of Automobile 
magazine. Among the other judges are Tom Gale, executive vice president 
of design for Chrysler; Steve Earle, founder of the Monterey Historic 
Races; Ken Gross, director of the Petersen Museum in Los Angeles; 
David Gooding, head of Christie's automobile department, and Brian 
Redman, three-time sports car world champion. The Vuitton Classic 
is open Friday and Saturday from 9 a.m. until 10 p.m. and on Sunday, 
from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. with a parade of all the cars at noon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>