<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0427 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Darryl Strawberry, the 36-year-old Yankees outfielder, was diagnosed 
with cancer of the colon Thursday. Doctors say his prognosis for recovery 
is excellent, according to Charisse Strawberry, the player's wife. 
Strawberry hopes to have surgery Saturday, or Monday at the latest, 
for the removal of a walnut-sized tumor, and according to his wife, 
doctors at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York are confident 
he will be able to resume his career next season. Strawberry's teammates, 
who will play Game 3 of their American League Division Series against 
Texas here Friday night, were informed of his condition by Manager 
Joe Torre before an afternoon workout here Thursday. Torre's voice 
cracked as he spoke, and several players began weeping. Shortly thereafter, 
the Yankees emerged from their clubhouse and went through their workout 
in almost complete silence, the only sound being that of bats striking 
balls during batting practice. Their communication was inferred. Pitcher 
David Cone, Strawberry's longtime teammate with the Mets in the past 
and now with the Yankees, stood alone, emotion covering his face. 
``Darryl is going to have a lot of confusion and he is going to be 
scared,'' said Cone. ``We are all scared. But the prognosis is good. 
From what we hear, there has been early detection and there is an 
excellent chance of full recovery.'' In a statement, Yankees' owner 
George Steinbrenner said: ``I have always said that this is a good 
man of great character and this has certainly proved to be true. He 
is facing a serious crisis and his concern is for his teammates. This 
is extremely upsetting to me and it really shows that baseball is 
only a small part of life.'' Strawberry, expected to be replaced on 
the team's roster by the outfielder Ricky Ledee, will remain in the 
hospital for six days following his surgery. According to his wife, 
doctors believe the tumor is of Grade A or Grade B variety, rather 
than the more serious Grade D, and that a colostomy _ removal of part 
of the colon _ won't be required. Charisse Strawberry, speaking in 
a telephone interview from the Strawberry's New Jersey home, said 
doctors believe the tumor has existed for about two years, developing 
from a polyp; and that regular chemotherapy treatment won't be necessary. 
They added that Strawberry would need only a one-time radiation treatment. 
Eric Davis, a longtime friend of Strawberry's since both grew up in 
Los Angeles and, recently, an outfielder with the Baltimore Orioles, 
was diagnosed with colon cancer in 1997, and a third of his colon 
was removed. He rebounded this year to rank among the American League 
batting leaders. Strawberry has evolved in his adult life under the 
constant scrutiny of New York baseball fans and media. Selected by 
the Mets as the first pick in the 1980 draft, Strawberry ascended 
to the majors three years later amid great expectations, which he 
seemed destined to fulfill. He hit 26 home runs in his rookie season 
and played center stage when the Mets won the World Series in 1986. 
But his inability to cope with the success led to problems with drugs 
and alcohol. Within two years after Strawberry left the Mets in 1990, 
he had become a shell of the player he once was, riddled with injuries 
and overwhelmed by his personal problems. Strawberry was suspended 
from baseball in 1995 for substance abuse, and he lost what remained 
of his fortune after being charged by the Internal Revenue Service 
with owing substantial back taxes. At 33 years old, Strawberry was 
an untouchable in baseball, his career seemingly over. Steinbrenner 
agreed to give Strawberry another chance, however, and in 1996, he 
hit 11 home runs in 202 at-bats, re-establishing himself. He had become 
more devoted to his faith and was a member of Alcoholics Anonymous. 
A knee injury sidelined him for virtually the entire 1997 season, 
but this year, Strawberry slugged 24 home runs in only 296 at-bats, 
and he had become a quiet leader, deeply respected by teammates. Late 
in the season, Strawberry's playing time decreased, and Torre had 
a sense something other than a chronic knee problem was bothering 
Strawberry. In fact, Strawberry suffered from abdominal pains for 
about two months, pain that he didn't reveal to teammates or the club's 
medical staff. Strawberry wanted to remain on the roster for the playoffs, 
wanted to remain a productive member of the lineup. But on Monday, 
he decided to tell the Yankees of his pain. A CAT scan performed Wednesday 
afternoon revealed a mass in his colon, and Strawberry told Torre 
he wouldn't be able to play in Game 2 of the Division Series, but 
that he hoped that after a colonoscopy Thursday, doctors would clear 
him to play in Game 3 Friday. Following the procedure Thursday morning, 
however, a physician informed the Strawberrys that the walnut-sized 
tumor found in his colon was cancerous. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>