<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0419 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co. said on Thursday that it had $1.4 billion 
of financial exposure to Long-Term Capital Management, the speculative 
hedge fund it helped rescue from bankruptcy last week. Merrill Lynch 
said it covered this exposure, which comes largely from serving as 
a major banker for Long-Term Capital, by requiring the hedge fund 
to provide cash and government bonds as collateral. But if Long-Term 
Capital had collapsed, the value of the hedge fund's derivatives might 
have sunk rapidly, causing steep losses at Merrill. Merrill Lynch 
was a leading member of the consortium of 14 big financial companies 
that injected $3.6 billion into the hedge fund to stave off bankruptcy. 
Merrill has said that it participated in that bailout because it feared 
that Long-Term Capital's collapse would damage the world financial 
system. A Merrill spokesman said on Thursday that the firm's large 
exposure to the fund did not influence its decision to partake in 
the rescue. ``We have said that even if there were a distress liquidation, 
given the secure collateral any loss would be fully manageable,'' 
said Tim Gilles, a Merrill spokesman. ``That was not the motivation 
for us to join. Our concern was the potential for disruption in global 
markets.'' Though almost all the big Wall Street firms had dealings 
with Long-Term Capital, which is based in Greenwich, Conn., Merrill's 
ties were arguably among the closest. The firm was an early equity 
investor in the fund, contributing $15 million at its 1994 inception. 
Before this week's recapitalization, that amount had already dwindled 
to $2 million, the firm said. Moreover, Merrill has a deferred compensation 
plan for senior executives that allows them to channel a portion of 
their income to Long-Term Capital. A total of 123 top executives there, 
including its chairman, David Komansky, have invested $22 million. 
Merrill officials deny that their personal stakes in Long-Term Capital 
influenced their decision to rescue the fund. They argue that all 
the top executives have much larger personal stakes in Merrill itself, 
and that they would not steer the company to take an action that was 
not in the interest of shareholders generally. Though Long-Term Capital 
is easily Merrill's most important client in the hedge fund world, 
other hedge funds owe it $700 million, most of that fully collateralized, 
the company said. Other banks and brokerage houses are also detailing 
the risks they took serving as underwriters, counterparties and lenders 
to hedge funds like Long-Term Capital, which lost huge sums of capital 
with ill-fated bets on world stock and bond markets. The Chase Manhattan 
Corp. has said it has $3.2 billion in total hedge fund exposure. Bankers 
Trust has said hedge funds owe it a total of about $875 million. Both 
banks have said they consider their exposure well backed by collateral. 
Both are also part of the Long-Term Capital rescue effort, but it 
was not clear how much of their total exposure was attributable to 
debts of that one hedge fund. Meanwhile, Italy's Foreign Exchange 
Office, a unit of the Bank of Italy, the country's central bank, said 
it had invested $100 million in the hedge fund and loaned it another 
$150 million. The bank said it expected to have the loan repaid now 
that Long-Term Capital was rescued. It equity investment was reduced 
in value by 90 percent, but the bank said it made stellar returns 
in previous years on its investment in the fund. Antonello Biagioli, 
the foreign exchange office's co-director, told Bloomberg News that 
the bank invested in Long-Term Capital, in part, to tap the expertise 
in derivatives of the firm's partners, including the Nobel prize winner 
Myron Scholes and John Meriwether, Long-Term Capital's chairman. Merrill's 
exposure to Long-Term Capital includes the risk it takes by serving 
as a counterparty to derivatives owned by Long-Term Capital _ taking 
the other side of the hedge fund's bets, the company said. The investment 
bank also made loans to Long-Term Capital in return for assets like 
government bonds, a transaction known as repos. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>