<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is 12:30 p.m. on a Wednesday on West 46th Street in Manhattan. 
Cars with suburban license plates pull into nearby garages. Charter 
buses unload streams of tourists who set out trolling for pre-theater 
lunch deals. And inside the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, the strains of 
a lone clarinet float up from the orchestra pit, just one of a very 
different set of rituals under way in preparation for the matinee 
performance of ``Titanic.'' Onstage, the gangplank _ emblazoned with 
``White Star Line'' in black on blinding white canvas _ is lowered 
from where it hangs in the wings and pinned into place for the opening 
number. Ginger ale is poured into the wine bottles and stored on the 
prop shelf, next to the boarding passes, binoculars, stateroom towels 
and telegrams. Cloth napkins are folded on the long first-class dining 
table. And the hydraulic elevator that lifts the lower portion of 
the stage to create two levels and tilts to simulate a sinking ship 
is tested to make sure that its computerized signals are cued up and 
functioning. So begins a day in the life of a Broadway show. Audiences 
generally know a production by its stars, story, music. Rarely do 
they get a glimpse behind the scenes, where the set and costume changes 
can be as intricately choreographed as the dancing, where the relationships 
may be as intense as those the actors portray onstage, and where the 
unexpected crises can be even more suspenseful than the plot. ``Titanic'' 
offers a particularly compelling example of the magnitude and the 
minutiae of this backstage drama. To begin with, the show is a beast 
of a production. There are 44 actors: 21 men and 15 women in the cast, 
plus 8 understudies who step into a variety of roles. The production 
is technically elaborate, involving everything from smoking coal bins 
to a sliding piano to a precarious crow's nest from which the lookout 
spots the iceberg. Because there is so little storage space in the 
wings, about 40,000 pounds of scenery and lights are hung in the fly 
loft and move during the show. The entire stage is raked at an angle, 
which makes high heels something of a challenge and has given several 
actors and stagehands chronic backaches. And handling all the technical 
elements, including rapid scene and costume changes, requires a substantial 
backstage crew that is both quick and calm, strong yet graceful. There 
are 13 carpenters, 7 prop men, 3 sound engineers, 2 electricians, 
1 light-board operator, 3 follow-spot operators, 2 men who run the 
automation computers and 3 flymen who pull the ropes that move the 
nonautomated pieces in and out. Coordinating all of this are four 
stage managers led by Leigh Catlett, whose even temper and gentle 
manner somehow make the whole operation look effortless. ``I have 
a great team of stage managers, and the stagehands are a great, efficient 
bunch of people,'' Catlett said. ``So they actually make my job really 
easy.'' The upkeep of the show between performances is a formidable 
undertaking. It includes the maintenance of 71 wigs, all made of human 
hair; every one needs to be reset after each performance, constantly 
brushed and occasionally shampooed. To handle all of this, the show 
has five hair and wig dressers. In the wig room on this day, Gary 
Martori, hair supervisor, and Chris Calabrese, his assistant, prepare 
the wigs for the afternoon performance: ``Grecians'' for the first-class 
passengers, ``Gibsons'' for second class, single braids for third. 
The captain's beard comes in four sections _ chin, two chops and mustache 
_ and has to be replaced about every five months; the mustaches for 
other men in the cast wear out faster, particularly because they often 
have to be ripped off and reapplied at top speed during quick changes. 
Each actor has about 20 rapid costume changes during the show. There 
are more than 180 costumes, every one of which was custom made for 
each actor. More than 275 hours are spent on costume maintenance a 
week, including the washing, starching and pressing of about 300 shirts. 
Juggling all this are 14 wardrobe people, 1 for every 3 actors. By 
1:30 p.m., the show is technically ready to go. The crew has run through 
every special effect, checked the lights and the sound. Backdrops 
that unfurl from the ground during the production have been loaded 
into the floor. The smoking room has been rolled out and the radio 
room rolled in. The porthole in the radio room has been switched to 
a day sky from a night sky. Suitcases are lined up neatly underneath 
the stairwell. A wardrobe person walks by with an armful of life preservers, 
copies of the actual vests worn on the Titanic. The cast arrives for 
the half-hour call. An actor who is late is obligated to call and 
alert one of the stage managers. If a cast member still has not shown 
up by the 15-minute mark, a swing, an actor who substitutes for several 
roles in the show, steps in. That's what happens today. At 1:30, Christopher 
Wells, who plays Jim Farrell, the young Irishman on whom a steerage 
passenger, Kate McGowan, sets her sights, calls to say he is running 
late. By 1:45 p.m., he still has not shown up, and Jonathan Brody, 
a swing, is tapped to go on. Brody has not played the role of Farrell 
in nine months, yet he seems surprisingly unperturbed. He hurriedly 
shaves, gets into his costume, looks over his lines and goes on. The 
swing who shares his dressing room, Romain Fruge, blithely continues 
sewing a quilt he brought in to pass the time. He will not be stepping 
in for anyone today. After the scene known as ``lifeboats'' toward 
the end of Act 2, the swings are free to go. Backstage, the first 
notes of the overture crackle through the dressing room speakers. 
Actors waiting in the wings as the opening number begins watch the 
conductor on a backstage monitor, so they can keep tempo during their 
offstage singing and make their entrances on cue. (italics)There she 
is! Tow'ring high Broad and grand Ship of dreams!(end italics0 Kevin 
Stites, the musical director, said the show was one of the most difficult 
to conduct, in large part because the music was practically continuous. 
Stites, who recently left the show to work on the forthcoming revival 
of ``On the Town,'' said he got only a two-minute break in Act I and 
a one-minute break in Act II. He said his favorite part was the opening 
sequence, when all the passengers are introduced. ``It keeps building,'' 
Stites said. ``It doesn't let down.'' After the lengthy opening sequence, 
the men dressed as the Titanic's crew members start stripping as soon 
as they hit the wings to change into their second-class passenger 
costumes, replacing their officers' caps with bowlers, pulling pin-stripe 
trousers on over their uniforms. Meanwhile, the scene in the captain's 
bridge, flown down from the rafters, begins up above. On the stage, 
carpenters attach the boiler room boxes for the next scene, and one 
of them fills each box with a puff from a smoke gun. Farther upstage, 
behind the scrim and out of sight of the audience, long tables are 
lowered from the wings covered with cloths, dishes and glasses, the 
salt shakers and silverware attached by Velcro. ``Titanic'' is under 
way. The matinee performance starts smoothly. The backstage crew is 
clearly comfortable with the production, having done it for a year 
and a half. Everyone seems to know where he should and should not 
be. So do the cast members, none of whom are allowed onstage during 
scenery shifts. The quick scene and costume changes have to work like 
clockwork. And they do. At one point, after the number ``What a Remarkable 
Age This Is!'' and before ``Lady's Maid,'' with only one song in between, 
27 men have to change from first-class into third-class passengers. 
All in one corridor. All at once. They charge offstage. A blur of 
black and white tuxedoes quickly degenerates into a locker room of 
underwear, and somehow the actors re-emerge four minutes later as 
working-class stiffs in wool trousers, jackets and boots. Without 
the hyperconsciousness the stage managers demand, the set can be life-threatening. 
Actors often have to exit from high levels in the dark. When the elevator 
part of the stage rises to its full height during the lifeboat scene, 
there is a 20-foot drop to the basement. The actors have been instructed 
to hold onto two people at all times. ``If I'm really tired, I have 
to rest before the lifeboat scene,'' said Victoria Clark, who has 
played Alice Beane, the second-class passenger who aspires to first-class 
grandeur, since the beginning. ``There is no railing up there. I have 
to say: `Wake up. Pay attention.' You can never walk though the show. 
If you're feeling under, you have to find the energy from somewhere 
because it's dangerous.'' The show's dance captain, Mindy Cooper, 
said a big part of her job was teaching new cast members how to fit 
into this harrowing backstage puzzle. ``The first day of rehearsal, 
I say to them, `Backstage is more choreographed than onstage because 
this theater is not big enough for this show,' '' she said. ``I also 
say, `This is a set that can kill you, and you can't be in the wrong 
place at the wrong time.' '' During this matinee, Brody does a commendable 
job as Farrell, although Jennifer Piech, who plays his love interest, 
Kate McGowan, later confides that she often has to nudge such replacements 
into position to keep them from colliding with other cast members. 
During intermission, Brody practices the part in the second act when 
he has to hang out from the wings on a harness to simulate leaning 
over a stairway rail as the boat is filling up with water. The day's 
next mini-crisis, after Wells missing his call, is a technical one: 
Several of the 38 wireless microphones worn by the actors are picking 
up interference. The stage managers say the problem might be the construction 
site next door, but there is no time to figure that out now. Microphones 
with clear signals are taken away from actors with less singing and 
given to actors who have more. The production typically goes through 
more than 1,000 AA batteries each week. The show is not frenetic for 
everyone all the time. There are periods, for example, when members 
of the female chorus lounge quietly in their dressing room. One studies 
lines for a different show. Another plays an electronic game of solitaire. 
Another does needlepoint. The men tend to be a little more raucous. 
Joseph Kolinski, who plays the first-class passenger Benjamin Guggenheim, 
tells his dirty joke of the day. (It is unprintable.) Like most theatrical 
productions, ``Titanic'' has its backstage rituals, which cast members 
tend to repeat at every performance. Rather than tire of these little 
traditions, the actors seem to treasure their familiarity. At the 
beginning of each act, for example, all the cast members touch the 
fake pregnant belly of Christine Long, who plays Madeleine Astor, 
for good luck before they go on. In Act II, actors cluster at the 
bottom of the stage-right stairs for what they call ``tea time'': 
paper cups of water from the water cooler. One of them brings a cup 
to the conductor in the orchestra pit. Stites, the musical director, 
saved every one of those cups. By the time he left the show, a tall 
stack of them teetered next to his music stand. At the same point 
during every performance, Ms. Clark and Hal Davis, who play Alice 
and Edgar Beane, sit on the same backstage staircase talking, and 
Davis ties Ms. Clark's life vest just before they enter for the lifeboats 
scene. Although the actors kid around backstage _ ``Bye, time to die'' 
_ onstage they seem to inhabit their characters and say they take 
their roles very seriously. For example, to prepare for her part as 
Ida Straus, the philanthropist who insists on going down with her 
husband, Isidor, Alma Cuervo said she read through Straus' personal 
papers and researched the character's Jewish roots. Similarly, Martin 
Moran, who has played the role of Harold Bride, the radioman, since 
the musical's workshop production, steeped himself in the arcana of 
wireless machines so that what his character taps out in Morse code 
onstage is actually the Titanic's call letters and SOS. At 4:20 p.m., 
cast members come onstage behind the curtain to take their places 
for the lifeboat scene, and the elevator underneath them begins to 
rise. But today, the elevator jams. There is a moment of confusion 
as the stage crew tries to figure out what has gone wrong and decides 
to stop the show. Moments later, a voice comes over the loudspeaker 
to make an announcement to the audience: Because of technical difficulties, 
there will be a slight delay. The stage managers try to lower the 
elevator into place, and it bangs into the stage. The cast is evacuated 
from elevated side ramps. The typically calm production stage manager, 
Catlett, is suddenly in high gear, darting around backstage, directing 
various crew members on his headset. Heather Cousens, an assistant 
stage manager, remains up on the elevator, pacing. At one point, she 
holds her head in her hands; at another, she puts her palms together 
in prayer. It turns out that the computer that runs the automation 
had gotten out of sync with the actual apparatus. The last time something 
like this happened was December. Though the delay lasts only 10 minutes, 
it feels like forever. Finally, the problem is corrected, the cast 
re-enters and the show resumes. One would think such incidents would 
shake most actors, make it difficult to pick up where they left off. 
But this group has been through worse. It is no secret that ``Titanic'' 
had one of the most difficult gestation periods in Broadway history. 
With a budget of $10 million, the show was too expensive and technically 
elaborate to try out on the road, so the director, Richard Jones, 
had to make his mistakes in New York, in front of preview audiences. 
Sometimes the show was even booed. Members of the cast and crew laugh 
now when they recall those trying days, when the show was constantly 
changing, when they went through countless different endings _ people 
jumped overboard in one, the ship split into two parts in another 
_ when lines were cut and others added, when they wondered if the 
production would ever be finished, much less successful. ``We did 
a different show every night,'' said Ms. Cooper, the dance captain. 
Then there was the bad word of mouth, the tittering about how a musical 
about the Titanic was a contradiction in terms. The technical glitches. 
And the bad reviews. But then came the Tonys: five of them, including 
best musical of 1997. (The show also won for best book, score, orchestrations 
and set.) And suddenly ``Titanic,'' with story and book by Peter Stone 
and music and lyrics by Maury Yeston, was a hit. No original cast 
or crew member, many of whom are still with the show, will forget 
that night. ``We screamed for about 24 hours,'' Ms. Cooper said. Although 
the musical opened well before James Cameron's film ``Titanic,'' starring 
Leonardo DiCaprio, the frenzy the movie created gave the Broadway 
show another welcome boost. The depths and heights of the experience, 
people involved in the show say, make the cast and crew unusually 
cohesive. Every person interviewed marveled at the level of support 
and generosity that has pervaded the production from the beginning. 
``We were so clobbered that we felt like we went through the wars 
together,'' Moran said. ``The gratifying experience of coming out 
the other end and being accepted and being enjoyed and loved, that 
was very bonding.'' Snapshots of the children of cast and crew members 
are taped up in the wings. One male dressing room features the first 
resume pictures of every member of the cast. People do things together 
when they are not working. Aside from having weathered hard times, 
``Titanic'' veterans say, their closeness has to do with the ensemble 
nature of the show itself; while there are principal parts, there 
are no stars. ``The responsibility for telling the story is really 
distributed throughout the company,'' Moran said. And because the 
musical strength of the show lies in its choral singing, Stites said, 
``there is no room for any diva attitude.'' As the matinee lets out 
at about 4:45, a few autograph seekers hover expectantly at the stage 
door. The cast and crew disperse for their dinner break. Some of them 
rush home to say hello to their children or simply to grab a bite 
in the neighborhood. They have to be back at the theater by 7:30. 
The evening show is considerably less eventful. Technicians worked 
on the elevator through the break, and this time it behaves. The microphone 
problem persists, so some actors are still singing without amplification. 
But Wells is back in his role as Jim Farrell, and the curtain comes 
down on a smooth performance. The crew prepares the stage for the 
next day. The actors take off their makeup, change back into their 
street clothes and leave through the stage door. There are no admiring 
fans outside this evening. Just the post-theater traffic on West 46th 
Street and audience members trudging back to the parking lots or charter 
buses with ``Titanic'' Playbills tucked under their arms, bending 
their heads against an early-autumn wind. The Broadway musical ``Titanic'' 
is performed at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, at 205 West 46th Street, 
on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 p.m.; Wednesdays and Saturdays 
at 2 and 8 p.m., and Sundays at 3 p.m. Tickets are $50 to $75; $20 
tickets for students and the elderly are available on the day of the 
show at the box office. Information: (212) 307-4100. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>