<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0489 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The city has agreed to pay nearly $3 million to settle a group of 
lawsuits filed by the family of Anthony Baez, a Florida man whose 
death in 1994 after a confrontation with police outside his family's 
home in the Bronx ignited a heated debate about police brutality. 
The Police Department later ruled that Baez had been the victim of 
an illegal chokehold used by Officer Francis Livoti, who has since 
been dismissed from the force. Livoti had been acquitted of criminally 
negligent homicide in a state trial in 1996, but he was convicted 
last June in U.S. District Court in Manhattan of violating Baez's 
civil rights. He is to be sentenced next week. In settling the civil 
cases, the city will not admit any liability in Baez's death, lawyers 
for both sides said. But the city's decision to settle the suit capped 
what from the start of the case seemed to be an eagerness among top 
city officials to put it behind them. Mayor Rudolph Giuliani _ usually 
an outspoken defender of the police _ never openly supported Livoti, 
and Police Commissioner Howard Safir dismissed Livoti from the force 
even though he had been acquitted in the criminal trial. Further, 
a mainstay of the city's defense was that Livoti was a renegade and 
that the city should not be held liable for his actions. In August, 
Justice Douglas McKeon of state Supreme Court in the Bronx rejected 
the city's position that it was not responsible for Livoti because 
he had violated department policy by using the illegal chokehold, 
setting the stage for the settlement. ``The city feels it is appropriate 
to put this unfortunate incident to rest,'' said city Corporation 
Counsel Michael Hess, ``and that a fair and equitable settlement was 
arrived at in order to dispose of all four pending lawsuits.'' Baez's 
death in 1994 focused a harsh spotlight on police brutality in New 
York. The case was widely held up as proof by many minorities that 
the Police Department was rife with officers with little regard for 
their rights, or, indeed, their lives, and it has continued to resonate 
as a political issue. Last year, Baez's mother, Iris Baez, ran an 
independent campaign for Bronx borough president on a platform as 
a crusader against police brutality. Thursday, city officials and 
lawyers for the family said they were satisfied with the $2.94 million 
settlement, which the city said was believed to be the largest recovery 
made against it in a wrongful-death action stemming from police misconduct. 
The family had sought $48 million in the wrongful-death suit. Mrs. 
Baez and other family members were not available for comment on Thursday 
night. But one of their lawyers, Susan Karten, said the settlement 
was significant ``because the city does not pay easily.'' Although 
the city is not admitting liability, Ms. Karten said the settlement 
``acknowledges for the first time the city's responsibility in keeping 
Livoti on the force.'' The question of whether Livoti's tendency toward 
abusive behavior should have been recognized earlier by the department 
became a central issue in the civil lawsuit and in the larger debate 
about how the department dealt with Livoti in the years before Baez's 
death. In a deposition of Livoti's former commander taken by the Baez 
family's lawyers, the supervisor, William Casey, testified that nine 
police brutality complaints had been lodged against Livoti before 
the 1994 death of Baez, yet senior police officials had rejected a 
recommendation by the commander that Livoti be transferred to a clerical 
job or a less stressful precinct. The testimony indicated that the 
transfer was rejected because Livoti was a police union delegate and 
was protected by connections high up in the chain of command. In addition 
to the department's handling of Livoti and the abuse complaints against 
him, the civil lawsuit highlighted the roles of other police officers 
who were on the scene when Livoti was accused of using the illegal 
chokehold In the criminal case, Livoti's defense was that his client 
had never used a banned chokehold to subdue Baez, and that Baez, who 
was 29, had died after suffering an asthma attack during a struggle 
with police. The confrontation occurred after Baez and his brothers 
were involved in a late-night family football game, and an errantly 
thrown football hit a police cruiser. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>