<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Parrying a rare wave of criticism, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan 
on Thursday defended the central bank's role in averting the collapse 
of Long-Term Capital Management LP, saying that it had acted out of 
concern for the stability of the financial markets rather than a desire 
to assist the investment firm's wealthy owners. Appearing before the 
House Banking Committee alongside William McDonough, the president 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Greenspan built a case that 
it was the central bank's responsibility to play a role in addressing 
a crisis whose effects could extend far beyond the fate of Long-Term 
Capital's owners, investors and lenders. ``Financial market participants 
were already unsettled by recent global events,'' Greenspan said, 
referring to the spread into Russia and Latin America of the financial 
crisis that began last year in Asia. ``Had the failure of LTCM triggered 
the seizing up of markets, substantial damage could have been inflicted 
on many market participants, including some not directly involved 
in the firm, and could have potentially impaired the economies of 
many nations, including our own,'' Greenspan said. Greenspan is usually 
heaped with praise for his stewardship of the economy when he appears 
before Congress. But Thursday, two days after cutting interest rates 
by one-quarter point to help insulate the United States from the global 
crisis, he heard respectful but nonetheless pointed questions and 
doubts from members of both parties about the Federal Reserve's involvement 
in saving a risky investment fund that catered to some of the wealthiest 
people. The lawmakers expressed considerable reservations about the 
Federal Reserve's decision to use its influence to buy some time for 
Long-Term Capital last week by helping to arrange a $3.6 billion rescue 
package from a group of big banks and investment houses. And they 
asked whether the Fed and other regulators should do more to regulate 
hedge funds and their sophisticated financial dealings. Rep. Spencer 
Bachus, R-Ala., said the message from Washington to welfare mothers 
and small businesses had been ``that it's not the job of the federal 
government to rescue you.'' The same message, he said, ``ought to 
also apply to rich Greenwich, Connecticut, investors who are multimillionaires, 
that we ought to use the same standards that we've used on the welfare 
mothers on these large hedge funds.'' Rep. Bruce Vento, D-Minn., said 
there seemed to be a gap between free market theory and decisions 
made by policy-makers. ``We hear a lot of speeches about free enterprise 
and the marketplace, but a lot of folks don't like to practice it,'' 
he said. ``The problem we have as representing our constituencies 
is that there seem to be two rules, a double standard: one for Main 
Street and another one for Wall Street.'' Rep. Jim Leach, R-Iowa, 
the committee's chairman, questioned whether the Fed's efforts to 
put together a rescue package raised antitrust concerns. He also questioned 
whether it had undermined a separate offer from a group including 
multibillionaire investor Warren Buffett and Goldman, Sachs &AMP; 
Co. The terms of that offer were reportedly less attractive to Long-Term 
Capital's owners, including its founder, John Meriwether, than the 
deal later struck by the group assembled by the Federal Reserve. ``Perhaps 
the only smart deal of the month that Long-Term Capital did was they 
played the Fed off against another party,'' Leach said. Other members 
seemed to be searching in frustration for ways to contain the risks 
posed by a small number of investment firms operating outside the 
regulatory system, that use vast amounts of borrowed money to make 
sophisticated financial market bets. ``I hope that we are going to 
be comforted that the regulators do now, in fact, have plans in place 
that would help avert such unfortunate circumstances in our future,'' 
said Rep. Richard Baker, R-La. Greenspan, however, stuck to his position 
that it would be difficult or even counterproductive to impose more 
direct regulation on the sophisticated investment firms known as hedge 
funds. Regulating hedge funds, Greenspan said, would drive them to 
operate from other nations with looser regulatory structures, undermining 
the ability of the United States to monitor them even indirectly through 
their lenders and investors. The best way to rein in gambling by those 
firms, Greenspan said, was to encourage their lenders to assess more 
rigorously the risks they are taking, and deny credit to those whose 
bets become unwise. In that way, he said, banking supervisors and 
other regulators can act as a second line of defense by pushing lenders 
to make sure their risk assessments are adequate. Under questioning 
from members of the committee, Greenspan admitted that same approach 
had failed in the case of Long-Term Capital Management. But he said 
such failures were inevitable in markets, that he had been surprised 
at how few there had been in the last five years and that he expected 
more of them in the future. Moreover, he said, if the financial system 
is unwilling to assume risks, the economy's ability to grow would 
be impaired. ``Let's not presume that the ideal outcome is more regulation,'' 
Greenspan said. Under pressure from members of the committee to explain 
why Long-Term Capital's troubles justified help from the Fed in arranging 
a rescue plan, Greenspan and McDonough said no taxpayer money was 
used and that the case should not be seen as a precedent for future 
intervention in the marketplace by the central bank. Indeed, they 
said, although the Fed brought all the players together, the deal 
that emerged stripped Long-Term Capital's owners of all but 10 percent 
of their stakes. In the long run, Greenspan said, the plan ``may well 
work to reduce the ultimate losses to the original owners of LTCM, 
but that was a byproduct, perhaps unfortunate, of the process.'' He 
acknowledged, however, that the case raised questions about what economists 
call moral hazard _ the idea that rescuing investors from a bet gone 
bad encourages further overly risky bets. But wiping out investors 
through a forced liquidation of the sort that Long-Term Capital faced 
would have made investors perhaps too frightened to take risks, Greenspan 
said, hurting the economy's ability to grow. As a result, he suggested, 
it is appropriate to intervene in the markets to stem potential panic. 
``Risk taking is a necessary condition for wealth creation,'' he said. 
``The optimum degree of risk aversion should be governed by rational 
judgments about the marketplace, not the fear flowing from fire sales.'' 
Rep. Maurice Hinchey, D-N.Y., pressed Greenspan on his opposition 
to further regulation of exotic securities called derivatives, which 
are essentially bets on the direction of stocks, bonds, currencies 
and interest rates. Greenspan replied that the ``degree of supervision 
and regulation of the over-the-counter derivatives market is quite 
adequate to maintain a degree of stability in the system.'' He supported 
language in a spending bill now before Congress that would prevent 
the Commodity Futures Trading Commission from proceeding with an effort 
to develop tighter regulations on derivatives. But Brooksley Born, 
the chairwoman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, later 
stepped up her warnings of the perils of not requiring more disclosure 
from banks and investment firms of their derivatives positions. ``This 
lack of basic information about the positions held by OTC derivatives 
users and the nature and extent of their exposures potentially allows 
OTC derivatives market participants to take positions that may threaten 
our regulated markets or, indeed, our economy with any federal agency 
knowing about it,'' Ms. Born told the committee. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>