<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0469 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
European stock markets, notably Germany's, plunged Thursday, as investors 
across the Continent seemed to conclude that they are no longer insulated 
from crises elsewhere. Banks and other financial institutions were 
among the biggest losers, battered by fears of more losses related 
to Asia, Russia and Latin America as well as by the shock waves from 
the near-collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, the American hedge 
fund. But traders and analysts said that Thursday's declines seemed 
to be driven more by a general anxiety than by specific news developments. 
``There is nothing really specific behind it,'' said Martin Coughlin, 
a European equity trader with Salomon Smith Barney in London. ``I 
think people are waking up to the fact that we are in a bear market.'' 
Though European markets had seemed relatively stable, analysts said 
investors had become convinced that the Continent was in for a measurable 
slowdown in economic growth. Germany's benchmark DAX stock index fell 
7.59 percent, with renewed fears about the vulnerability of the nation's 
biggest banks. Dresdner Bank, which acknowledged Wednesday that it 
would have to take additional write-offs, dropped nearly 8 percent, 
to 57.20 marks _ roughly $34.50. Commerzbank dropped 9 percent, to 
41.40 marks. Rumors circulated all day that more European banks would 
report write-offs or take provisions for loan losses. The fears have 
been in the air for months, but became more noticeable last week with 
the bailout of Long-Term Capital. UBS AG of Switzerland, Europe's 
biggest bank, announced last week that it would lose more than $700 
million because of the global financial crises and its exposure to 
Long-Term Capital. Thursday, UBS rattled nerves again by announcing 
plans for a news conference Friday morning in Zurich. Though bank 
industry executives doubted that UBS would report more bad news a 
week after its last disclosure, many investors were convinced that 
any news would be bad news. But there was plenty to worry about elsewhere. 
German automakers and chemical companies saw their stocks sink amid 
fears that exports would be hurt by Asian recessions and by the recent 
increase in the value of the mark, which makes German goods more expensive 
elsewhere. Most other European markets were caught up in Thursday's 
selling _ including London, Paris and Madrid. Blue chips in London 
sank 3.08 percent. The CAC index of leading stocks in Paris plunged 
5 percent. Spain took nearly as hard a hit as Germany, with the benchmark 
index losing 7.08 percent. Serge Vanheurck, a stockbroker at Kredietbank 
in Brussels, said investors had suffered an abrupt and substantial 
loss of nerve. ``It is a pure loss of confidence,'' he said. ``People 
have lost confidence in the stock market in general, and in the European 
stock market.'' Thursday's fall in prices may also have been a correction 
from too much complacency, as the storm clouds from Asia and elsewhere 
became more ominous. Some analysts began noting six months ago that 
European companies had been noticeably slower than American companies 
to lower earnings forecasts, and warned of earnings surprises. European 
investors have tended to be more averse to risk than Americans. But 
in the first half of the year, European markets _ fueled by a long-awaited 
cyclical recovery and a rush into stocks _ grew faster than markets 
in the United States. Now they are falling faster, as sentiment shifts 
from a fear of being left out to a fear of being left in. Optimists 
pinned their hopes late Thursday on a recovery in the Dow Jones industrial 
average, but they were disappointed when Wall Street opened sharply 
lower. The markets sank even deeper. ``It brought tears to your eyes,'' 
said Peter Pietsch, a spokesman for Commerzbank. If there were not 
many concrete news developments Thursday, there were reasons to feel 
grim. One was the International Monetary Fund's unusually bleak forecast 
Wednesday for the world economy, which envisioned growth slowing by 
half to about 2 percent for 1998. There was also new evidence Thursday 
that European exports, which have been the engine of growth in Germany 
and France, are sputtering. Michael Rogowski, head of the German machine-tool 
manufacturers' association, said foreign orders dropped 4 percent 
in August. The industry is cutting its growth forecast for 1998 to 
4 percent from 7 percent. Rogowski said the Asian crisis had become 
worse than companies expected. But exports could also be hurt by a 
recent decline in the dollar's value, relative to the German mark 
and other European currencies. The dollar has dropped from 1.8 marks 
in August to 1.64 marks Thursday, hastened lately by the Federal Reserve's 
reduction of U.S. interest rates by one-quarter of a percentage point. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>