<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
MISCALCULATIONS, POLITICS AND SAFETY NETS On a steaming January day, 
Michel Camdessus, the IMF's top official, slipped into Jakarta to 
the private residence of President Suharto and sat down for a four-hour 
meeting to tick off, line by line, the huge reforms Indonesia would 
have to implement in return for tens of billions of dollars in emergency 
aid. Two previous deals had collapsed when Suharto ignored the fund's 
conditions, so Camdessus insisted that he strike a deal directly with 
Suharto, then Asia's longest-serving leader. It was a meeting of men 
who knew different worlds of power politics: Suharto rose as a general 
in central Java, and Camdessus had detonated mines in Algeria for 
the French army before entering the French Treasury on his way to 
becoming head of France's central bank. ``It was all there,'' a senior 
IMF official recalled. ``He was told he had to dismantle the national 
airplane project, the clove monopoly, all the distribution monopolies.'' 
At one point, Camdessus looked at the impassive Suharto and said, 
``You see what this means for your family,'' a reference to their 
vast investments in the country's key industries. ``He said, `I called 
in my children, and they all understand.''' But within months, that 
exchange in Jakarta came to symbolize the IMF's twin troubles: Its 
inability to understand and reckon with the national politics of countries 
in need of radical reform, and its focus on economic stabilization 
rather than the social costs of its actions. Suharto had no intention 
of fulfilling the agreement. It was, one of his former Cabinet members 
said, ``a delaying move that was obvious to everyone except Camdessus.'' 
Perhaps one reason why the IMF sometimes appears tone-deaf is that 
its senior staff is almost entirely composed of Ph.D. economists. 
There are few officials with deep experience in international politics, 
much less the complexities of Javanese culture that were at work in 
Indonesia. Historically, experts in politics and security have gravitated 
to the United Nations, development experts to the World Bank, and 
economists to the IMF _ creating dangerous gaps in a crisis like this 
one. As a result, the fund had only a rudimentary understanding of 
what would happen if its demands were met and all Indonesia's state 
monopolies were quickly dissolved. While that system lined the pockets 
of the Suhartos and their friends, it also distributed food, gasoline 
and other staples to a country that stretches for 3,000 miles over 
thousands of islands. To help balance the budget, the fund demanded 
a quick end to expensive subsidies that keep the price of food and 
gasoline artificially low. But that, combined with the huge currency 
devaluation that sparked the crisis, resulted in high prices and shortages 
that fueled riots that continue to this day, as millions of Indonesians 
lose their jobs. The IMF _ unintentionally, its officials insist _ 
also sped Suharto's resignation, insisting on the elimination of ``crony 
capitalism,'' code words for removing the Suharto family from the 
center of the economy. Ultimately, that may prove to be Indonesia's 
salvation, if the new government can contain the rioting against the 
ethnic Chinese minority _ whose money is desperately needed to save 
the country's fast-shrinking economy. ``It is worth noting,'' Fischer 
said this week, ``that our programs in Asia _ in Indonesia, Korea 
and Thailand _ only took hold after there was a change in government.'' 
Nonetheless, the Indonesia experience has revived the argument that 
the IMF is so focused on stabilizing banks and currencies, on preventing 
capital flight and freeing up markets, that it is blind to the social 
costs of its actions. Among the toughest critics has been its sister 
institution, the World Bank, whose main charge is alleviating poverty. 
``You've seen the tension almost every day,'' one senior World Bank 
official said recently. The bank has gone to extraordinary lengths 
in recent months to differentiate its role from that of the fund, 
and to announce a tripling of aid to the poorest in the countries 
hit by the economic chaos. Even U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan 
has joined the argument, warning in a speech at Harvard recently that 
``if globalization is to succeed, it must succeed for poor and rich 
alike. It must deliver rights no less than riches. It must be harnessed 
to the cause not of capital alone, but of development and prosperity 
for the poorest of the world.'' IMF officials say they are changing 
strategies when they see they are exacting too great a social cost. 
``It's a very difficult formula to get exactly right,'' Fischer said 
in August, as Russia was teetering and the IMF was sending in $4.8 
billion in aid that was rapidly wasted. ``You need enough discipline 
to send the right message to the markets and keep investors from fleeing. 
But you need enough leeway to keep people from suffering more than 
they otherwise would.'' In recent months, he noted, the IMF has allowed 
more spending to sustain subsidies for basic goods for longer periods 
in Indonesia, Korea and elsewhere. ``There is a new flexibility at 
the IMF'' a senior Indonesian official concluded recently. ``It is 
a lot better.'' A U.S. PAWN, OR A RUNAWAY AGENCY? The Clinton administration 
admits that the IMF has many failings, many of them on display this 
year. But it insists that the world has gone through global financial 
crises without an IMF once before in this century _ and the result 
was the 1930s. ``I have no doubt the situation over the past year 
would have been much worse _ with greater devaluations, more defaults, 
more contagion, and greater trade dislocations _ without the program 
agreed with the IMF and the finance it has provided,'' Deputy Treasury 
Secretary Lawrence Summers told Congress last week. Many Republicans 
and some Democrats are unconvinced. Even though the Senate has overwhelmingly 
approved an $18 billion contribution to the fund to help it fight 
new crises, the House defeated that measure two weeks ago. The fund's 
last hope of getting the money, which will free up nearly $100 billion 
in contributions from other nations waiting for the United States 
to act, will come when the House and Senate try to resolve their budget 
differences in a conference committee in the next 10 days. A rejection, 
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin insists, would send a message around 
the world that the United States is turning its back on the one institution 
charged with restoring economic stability. Everywhere else in the 
world, though, politicians and businessmen insist that one of the 
biggest problems with the IMF is that, contrary to the view of Congress, 
it acts as the U.S. Treasury's lap dog. Ask in Jakarta or Moscow, 
and the response is the same: The IMF never ventures far without looking 
back for the approving nod of its master. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>