<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the world's finance ministers and central bankers gathered last 
year in Hong Kong, they nervously congratulated each other for containing 
_ at least for the moment _ a nasty financial brush fire in Asia. 
In a year's time, many predicted in hallway chatter, the troubles 
in Thailand and Indonesia would look like a replay of Mexico in 1995 
_ a rough bump in the road for a world enjoying remarkable prosperity. 
Talk about bad market calls. Twelve months later, as the same financial 
mandarins clog Washington with their limousines and glide through 
endless receptions at the annual meeting of the International Monetary 
Fund and the World Bank, just about everything that could have gone 
wrong in the world economy has: the worst downturn in Japan since 
World War II, economic meltdown in Russia, a depression in Indonesia 
that is plunging 100 million people below the poverty line, and deep 
fears over what happens next in Latin America. What makes this year's 
IMF meeting most remarkable, though, is that the harshest criticisms 
are directed at the monetary fund itself, and, by extension, at the 
U.S. Treasury, which is viewed as the power behind the IMF. This year, 
in place of confident predictions, there are mutual recriminations. 
Arguments are breaking out over whether the true culprits were crony 
capitalists and weakened leaders like Russian President Boris Yeltsin, 
or huge investors who poured money into the world's emerging markets 
with reckless abandon in the mid-1990s and panicked in the past 12 
months. Whatever the reason, one reality prevails: Hundreds of billions 
of dollars have fled from economies on four continents _ seeking the 
safest havens possible, often in the United States _ and the money 
is not returning anytime soon. And the subtext of every seminar on 
capital flows and every conclave of nervous ministers will be some 
painfully blunt questions: Can this be stopped? Or is the world headed 
for a global recession? Fifty-three years ago the IMF was created 
after the Bretton Woods conference which sought to stabilize the world 
economy and secure the peace after World War II. Now it is under attack 
from all sides, charged not only with worsening a bad situation by 
misjudging the economics, but with being politically tone-deaf in 
some of the most volatile capitals in the world, from Jakarta, Indonesia, 
to Moscow. For the first time, there are disturbing questions about 
whether the institution itself is still capable, financially or politically, 
of containing the kind of economic contagion that caught the world 
unaware. Once, the IMF's critics were largely found in Africa and 
South Asia, were the fund was often viewed as arrogant; today they 
include Wall Street's biggest players and top officials in the most 
powerful economies of Asia and Europe. Only a few _ including former 
Secretary of State George Schultz and members of Congress who are 
increasingly suspicious of all international institutions _ are talking 
about scrapping the IMF altogether. But almost everyone is talking 
about creating a ``new financial architecture'' that can do what the 
old one clearly cannot: smother financial wildfires before they leap 
around the globe. President Clinton, British Prime Minister Tony Blair 
and other leaders, after months of silence, have edged into the debate, 
in some cases wresting the issue for the first time from their finance 
ministers and central banks. Their fear, their advisers say, is that 
15 months of financial turmoil are now threatening political stability. 
Such concerns have turned this year's meeting into a tumbled mass 
of worries and a groping for short and long-term solutions. The Japanese, 
the French, the Southeast Asians are all arriving in Washington with 
different diagnoses of what went wrong, and different solutions about 
how to set it right. The United States has its own set of plans, a 
mix of suggestions to force more disclosure of financial data in countries 
around the world and to impose more American-style financial standards 
and regulation. Meanwhile, an ideological argument is breaking out 
over whether the world should slow down a long march toward more free 
and open markets _ a strategy pressed by the Clinton administration 
for the past six years. Others argue that it is unwise to start rebuilding 
the hospital while the patients are still on the operating tables. 
``Last year the standard answer that all of us were given came down 
to this: `We have the IMF and the World Bank, and they know best,''' 
Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas said over breakfast in Washington 
the other day, reflecting on how the crisis turned 30 years of astounding 
growth in his country into an overnight depression. ``Then they said 
everything that went wrong was our fault,'' he said. ``But now, now 
I think people know that much of the problem came from the outside, 
and we need something better.'' And the IMF itself is beginning to 
fight back, an awkward role for an institution dominated by Ph.D. 
economists who are unaccustomed to being openly challenged. ``Every 
place you turn you read the same story, that we came in, that we made 
things worse,'' said Stanley Fischer, the deputy managing director 
of the fund, who was born in Northern Rhodesia _ now Zambia _ and 
became chairman of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's economics 
department before taking a job that has now put him in the center 
of the financial storm. ``We frequently get the blame, some of it 
well-deserved,'' he said. ``But it is politically convenient for governments 
around the world to cry, `The IMF made us do it,' and pin their mistakes 
on us. That's fine. We'd rather be loved, but more than that we'd 
like to be effective.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>