<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0432 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton raised his offer to $700,000 Thursday to settle 
the sexual misconduct lawsuit against him by Paula Jones, who was 
considering whether to accept it, lawyers involved the case said. 
The offer was relayed to Mrs. Jones at her California home Thursday 
morning. Her lawyers had previously asked the White House for $1 million 
to have her withdraw the lawsuit. The negotiations to settle the lawsuit 
that led to the president being put at risk of impeachment have gone 
back and forth in the last several days solely over the question of 
money. In the latest round of negotiations, which began on Sept. 8, 
Mrs. Jones dropped her demand for an apology or some acknowledgment 
that her complaint about Clinton was valid. She sued the president 
in 1994, saying that three years earlier when he was governor of Arkansas 
and she was a state clerical worker, he invited her to a Little Rock 
hotel room where he dropped his trousers and made a coarse sexual 
request. Clinton disputed her account, although he never denied that 
he may have had her summoned to his hotel room for an introduction. 
All previous attempts to negotiate a settlement had foundered on her 
insistence on some statement of regret or contrition from the president. 
Clinton's lawyers last week made a counter-offer of $500,000, which 
the Jones camp immediately rejected as too little. A federal judge 
dismissed Mrs. Jones' lawsuit in April, writing that even if her accusations 
were true, they did not constitute a case of sexual harassment or 
a deprivation of her constitutional rights as she asserted. But an 
appeals court has scheduled Oct. 20 to hear Mrs. Jones' arguments 
that the lawsuit should be reinstated because Clinton lied when he 
told her lawyers last January that he had not engaged in sexual relations 
with Monica Lewinsky. Clinton has since admitted a sexual liaison 
with Ms. Lewinsky, and White House lawyers fear that his reversal 
may be enough to have the lawsuit reinstated. White House advisers 
have said they would like to settle the Jones lawsuit to help them 
deal with the impeachment process. The House is considering whether 
to impeach Clinton after Kenneth Starr, the Whitewater independent 
counsel, charged that he committed perjury when he told the Jones 
lawyers in a deposition that he had not engaged in sexual relations 
with Ms. Lewinsky. Starr also asserted that Clinton committed perjury 
again when he repeated that position before a federal grand jury. 
A settlement of the lawsuit would not necessarily help Clinton legally, 
his advisers have said. But they believe that if the lawsuit were 
removed from the equation, it could bolster their arguments to Congress 
that his deceptions were minor and only constituted an understandable 
effort to conceal an improper sexual relationship. A settlement would 
give Mrs. Jones some guaranteed money after four years of grueling 
litigation. Any money received in a settlement would, however, have 
to be divided among her and her lawyers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>