<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0439 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Democratic House leaders Thursday night brushed aside any possibility 
of a quick censure deal for President Clinton, and instead for the 
first time endorsed a proposal that would allow party members to vote 
for a limited impeachment inquiry next week, party officials said. 
The proposal would give Democratic representatives the freedom to 
vote for an inquiry instead of hewing to a party line against an investigation 
that could leave them vulnerable before the November elections. The 
proposal would impose a time limit of one to three months on the inquiry 
and restrict the investigation to Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky, 
according to several Democrats. While this means that most Democrats 
will oppose the Republicans' impeachment inquiry, it nonetheless puts 
them on the record as supporting a formal impeachment investigation 
into the president's conduct. ``This cannot be an open-ended fishing 
expedition,'' said Rep. John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the ranking 
Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, at an afternoon news conference. 
The Democratic measure is certain to fail in the Republican-controlled 
Congress. Republicans on the Judiciary Committee have already drafted 
a resolution that would place no time limits or restrictions on an 
impeachment inquiry so that an investigation could delve into matters 
like campaign finance or the White House travel office. But Democratic 
leaders hope their proposal may keep as many as 50 Democrats from 
voting for the Republican proposal next week and giving their opponents' 
plan a bipartisan endorsement. Some Democrats, especially those in 
swing districts, are concerned about looking too easy on Clinton prior 
to November's elections. Anticipating next week's vote, the president 
and Hillary Rodham Clinton are making personal pleas to members, urging 
them to vote against any sort of inquiry, according to some Democrats. 
White House press secretary Mike McCurry said the White House was 
still trying to carry the argument that there are ``no grounds for 
impeachment.'' ``We will not get to everybody,'' he said. ``We don't 
pretend that we will. But I think a lot of people, as they think about 
the argument and think about the gravity of impeachment and think 
about what the framers meant when they talked about high crimes and 
misdemeanors will want to think twice about that decision.'' Wednesday 
evening, Clinton called Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., a dean of the 
House, to gauge his feelings on the matter. And Mrs. Clinton spoke 
with, among others, Rep. Charles Rangel, D-N.Y., and Rep. Patrick 
Kennedy, D-R.I., during a recent visit to Puerto Rico. ``The president 
is our president,'' Kennedy said Thursday, recounting Mrs. Clinton's 
conversation with him. But Kennedy said some Democrats are clearly 
worried about taking too easy a stance about Clinton's behavior. ``One 
of the things that's very destructive is the worry that many members 
have that there's another shoe to drop, and they don't want to be 
caught going back to their districts saying, `I voted against an inquiry 
and look what they found,' '' Kennedy said. ``They're looking to cover 
their political behinds.'' Monday, the Judiciary Committee is expected 
to vote on a Republican-written resolution, modeled on the Watergate 
proposal, that would officially open an impeachment inquiry. The committee 
will also vote on the Democratic alternative. A full House vote on 
both proposals should occur later next week. The chief Democratic 
investigator will argue before the committee Monday that the evidence 
delivered by Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr does not rise to the 
level of impeachment, Democratic officials said. Republicans will 
argue that the evidence suggests the opposite and that the matter 
should be investigated further. Democrats vehemently oppose the Republican 
resolution, saying it contains no time limit and is far too broad. 
The resolution also gives Democrats the power to subpoena witnesses 
and grants the White House full representation during the proceedings. 
In a letter to Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., the chairman of the Judiciary 
Committee, Conyers asked that he ``limit both the time and scope'' 
of the inquiry. But Hyde has said he is simply doing what the Democrats 
have asked for all along, following the Watergate model, which placed 
no restrictions on either the time or the subject of the investigation. 
Republicans argue that they must leave the window open in case Starr 
sends another referral to the House. A bipartisan group of members 
on the panel is starting a conversation with Starr to find out whether 
he intends to send another referral. ``One day they want us to follow 
the Watergate model,'' said Rep. Charles Canady, R-Fla, a member of 
the panel. ``The next day they say, `Don't follow the Watergate model.' 
'' Added his colleague Rep. Stephen Buyer, R-Ind., ``There is a tremendous 
amount of double-speak going on. What's the purpose of double-speak? 
To create diversion.'' But Democrats, in what has become a familiar 
war of words over Watergate, said Republicans are comparing apples 
to oranges and are unfairly applying the Watergate standard to a scandal 
that is less important. ``This is not an investigation into the wholesale 
subversion of government involving multiple agencies, the FBI, the 
CIA and others,'' Conyers said. The committee has approved the release 
Friday of about 5,000 pages of supplemental evidence to the Starr 
report, including the testimony of the president's secretary, Betty 
Currie, and the transcripts of tapes between Ms. Lewinsky and her 
former friend, Linda Tripp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>