<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For her unflinching portraits of people caught in the savage ``little'' 
wars of the last 20 years, notably in Central America, the Magnum 
photographer Susan Meiselas has won many of the top prizes awarded 
members of her profession, including the Overseas Press Club's Robert 
Capa Gold Medal in 1979 (for ``best published photographic reporting 
from abroad requiring exceptional courage and enterprise'') and a 
MacArthur fellowship in 1992. Bracketing her war photography are two 
little-known projects, and photographs from them are on view at the 
Leica Gallery in Soho. In the early 1970s, she spent three summers 
photographing strippers at rural New England fairs. Then, over three 
weeks of 16-hour days in 1995, she photographed the women who worked 
at Pandora's Box in Manhattan, a self-styled ``Disneyland of Domination,'' 
and the well-heeled men who frequented it. Strip joints and domination 
palaces are their kind of war zone. All three have long been the subjects 
of photographers, but as Ms. Meiselas does with her pictures of war, 
she brings a special sensibility to her portraits of strippers and 
dominatrixes. In addition to their high esthetics, the pictures are 
ideologically and emotionally complex, leaving the viewer to figure 
out what Ms. Meiselas' point of view might be. One aspect of her photography 
is never ambiguous. Like Larry Burrows in his pictures of the Vietnam 
War for Life magazine, Ms. Meiselas insists on seeing people as people, 
no matter where they find themselves. Which is not to say that her 
pictures are easy to look at. Superficially, her black-and-white photographs 
of carnival strippers offer a painful look at women (few with fine 
physiques) who bare all in cheesy, cramped settings. There are the 
usual male barkers, men counting money and men grabbing at the strippers 
onstage. But Ms. Meiselas manages a subtle visual sleight of hand 
when she shows an audience's amazement at a stripper's removing her 
clothes, quite as though she had done something magical. In this, 
her first photographic project, Ms. Meiselas' signature artful reporting 
is very much in evidence. In ``Lulu and Debbie, Tunbridge, Vt., 1974,'' 
a seated woman, cigarette in hand and biting her lower lip, seems 
a world away from a woman next to her who is drawing aside a dirty 
curtain and about to show her naked form. In the triangular space 
between the curtain and the wall is a glimpse of the audience, a young 
man in the front row looking expectantly at the emerging figure. ``Lena, 
Barton, Vt., 1974'' is deceptively innocent. In the foreground and 
in deep shadow are men's backs. In the background is a valentinelike 
tableau, the spotlight falling on a young woman with short blond hair 
and a fragile face standing against a stage backdrop of bold diagonal 
lines and twin hearts pierced with an arrow. The most singular images 
in the stripper series are two nude studies that are compositionally 
classical and gritty versions of a Rubens or a Matisse _ portraits 
of women with less-than-perfect bodies who are comfortable in their 
skin. In ``Returning Backstage, Essex Junction, Vt., 1973,'' Ms. Meiselas 
catches a stripper stepping over a naked woman stretched out on the 
floor. Behind the upright woman is a dirty curtain, to one side of 
which is a wooden wall with patterns that form an unexpected and striking 
modernist abstraction. In ``Between Shows, Fryeburg, Me., 1975,'' 
torsos frame a seated young woman with a thin wrap around her hunched 
shoulders and a sublime Mona Lisa hint of a smile on her face. Taken 
almost 20 years later, Ms. Meiselas' ``Pandora's Box'' series in deep, 
rich colors could be read as hard-edged post-modernism that is in 
line with Cindy Sherman's increasingly unappetizing photographic personas 
and Nan Goldin's portraits of the downtown drug milieu. Ms. Meiselas 
was told about Pandora's Box by a film director who knew of her ``Carnival 
Strippers'' series, and her photographs show a ``fantasy land'' with 
rooms full of ersatz period furnishings and dungeonlike places with 
vaguely sinister torture racks and cells. Men in grotesque costumes, 
usually with leather masks over their heads, submit to various ``tortures'' 
by women in black fetish wear and impossibly high heels. Ms. Meiselas' 
impeccable eye takes in a client in a black suit seated on a black 
sofa in a room with maroon walls and carpeting, a blue door keeping 
his face from view. Another client's chest is bared, his head encased 
in a black mask with spikes at the crown. His medieval torture-chamber 
presence is starkly at odds with the seemingly opulent scene behind 
him, with its red-and-gold carpeting, gold curtains and a large painting 
of a naked woman with cupids. A dominatrix in a silver ensemble is 
seated nonchalantly on a gold upholstered chair set on a raised marble 
platform. Most of the men, who pay large sums to be humiliated or 
tortured or both, are masked. In ``Foot Worship, the Role Play Room, 
Pandora's Box, New York, 1995,'' only the client's eyes are visible 
through the mask, and they are bloodshot, their expression one of 
desperation. Photographing at Pandora's Box, Ms. Meiselas said, gave 
her nightmares. As she photographed men who chose the weapons and 
duration of torture, images from Central America ricocheted through 
her head, images of Nicaraguans and Salvadorans who were tortured 
and who had no choice in the matter. The artificial dungeons in Pandora's 
Box, she said, revived memories of prison cells in Nicaragua and El 
Salvador and people bearing the dreadful scars of torture. As she 
never did when she photographed the carnival strippers, Ms. Meiselas 
seemed at times to avert her uncompromising gaze at Pandora's Box. 
With these pictures of trussed-up men, of men in fright masks and 
women's clothes or with shorts pulled down around the legs, her mind 
seems to have gone into suspension while the camera clicked away, 
and the results veer uncomfortably toward the promotional. When she 
appears fully engaged, the images are extraordinary. In two photographs 
that have a certain Mistress Delilah in them, Ms. Meiselas first shows 
her laughing at a tied-up cross-dresser. But in ``Solitaire and Delilah, 
the Dressing Room, Pandora's Box, New York, 1995,'' a different face 
emerges. Here, a dominatrix in full regalia, leather mask and all, 
takes up one side of the frame; on the other side is Delilah looking 
utterly spent. ``Susan Meiselas, Intimate Strangers: Carnival Strippers 
1972-75, Pandora's Box, 1995'' remains at the Leica Gallery, 670 Broadway, 
at Prince Street, Soho, through Oct. 24. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>