<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0477 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Virginia judge ruled Thursday that a woman could remove the feeding 
tube that has kept her comatose husband alive in a vegetative state 
for more than three years, but Gov. James S. Gilmore III ordered almost 
immediately that an appeal of the ruling be taken to the state Supreme 
Court. The woman, Michele Finn, was given the right to allow her husband, 
Hugh, 44, to die in a nursing home, and she excoriated Gilmore for 
having intervened and ``putting me through sheer hell.'' ``They obviously 
have total disregard for me and my husband's wishes _ not only for 
me, but for the laws of this state,'' Mrs. Finn said at the Prince 
William County Circuit Court in Manassas, a suburb of Washington. 
She maintained that her husband, a patient at the Annaburg Manor Nursing 
Home in Manassas, would not have wanted to remain in a vegetative 
state. Lila Young, Gilmore's press spokeswoman, said Thursday afternoon 
in Richmond: ``The governor is highly sympathetic to the Finn family 
and understands their anguish and has no wish to exacerbate it. However, 
he feels that it is his job as governor to protect those in society 
who can least protect themselves.'' In Thursday's ruling, Judge Frank 
Hoss Jr. rejected Gilmore's arguments, saying: ``The governor says 
Hugh Finn is not in a persistent vegetative state. This court has 
found otherwise.'' Hoss said Virginia law allowed the withholding 
of food and water, adding, ``It merely permits the natural process 
of dying. It does not relate to mercy killing or euthanasia.'' Dr. 
Robin Merlino, medical director of the nursing home, said that when 
a feeding tube was removed, a comatose person became dehydrated and 
the kidneys failed, leading to death. This can take days or weeks. 
One of Mrs. Finn's lawyers, Gary Eakes of Alexandria, Va., criticized 
Gilmore's efforts, saying, ``It's ironic that the Virginia governor 
intervenes in a case where he says he is acting to protect Hugh Finn's 
interests, but his actions are directly contrary to the express wishes 
of Hugh Finn.'' Eakes said Finn had prepared a directive that he be 
allowed to die in such circumstances, but had been gravely injured 
in a car accident before he could sign it. Robert Marsh, the Prince 
William County court administrator, said Gilmore's order that an appeal 
be made did not automatically suspend Hoss' ruling, leaving Mrs. Finn 
free to have the feeding tube removed. A state supreme court official 
said any member could order the appeal to be heard and suspend Hoss' 
decision. Eakes said the family would not announce to the public when 
the feeding tube would be removed. The Associated Press reported Thursday 
night that the feeding tube had been removed Thursday morning. Finn 
is a former television news anchor in Louisville, Ky. His aorta was 
ruptured in a traffic accident in Louisville in March 1995, depriving 
his brain of oxygen and leaving him unable to eat, care for himself 
or communicate. Under Virginia law, life supports may be removed if 
a person is in a persistent vegetative state, the condition that doctors 
said Finn was in. On Sept. 18, however, a nurse employed by the state 
visited Finn at the nursing home and filed a report in which she said 
that he had greeted her with a ``Hi'' and had smoothed his hair during 
the 75 minutes she watched him. He had been taken to Manassas from 
Louisville in 1996 to be nearer his parents' home in Woodbridge, Va. 
Mrs. Finn said that the nurse was mistaken and that Finn did not react 
but simply made guttural noises. She said her husband had told her 
he would not want to live in such a condition. In June, Mrs. Finn 
decided to remove her husband's feeding tube. At first, Finn's brother 
John went to court to prevent Mrs. Finn from removing the tube. Hoss 
ruled against John Finn on Aug. 31, saying that Mrs. Finn, as her 
husband's guardian, had the right to have the feeding tube removed. 
On Monday, John Finn and other family members ended their opposition, 
leaving Mrs. Finn free to have the tube removed on Wednesday, the 
deadline Hoss had set for appeals. It was then that Gilmore tried 
to block the removal, with his lawyers filing his appeal just an hour 
before the tube could have been removed at midnight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>