<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John William Meriwether was the consummate trader. He knew when to 
hold, he knew when to fold. But as the chairman of Long-Term Capital 
Management LP, he failed to recognize that his luck and his money 
were fast running out. Last week they did run out, as a consortium 
of big international banks and brokerage firms agreed to inject $3.65 
billion into Long-Term Capital, the giant hedge fund that Alan Greenspan, 
chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, worried would disrupt the global 
financial markets if it failed. A quiet, introverted man with a head 
for numbers and a love of chance, Meriwether by all accounts was deemed 
most likely to succeed by those who worked with him over the years. 
A student of the bond markets, he knew their anomalies _ and how to 
play them _ better than anyone. But in his previous work as a bond-trading 
star at Salomon Brothers, Meriwether had something he would sorely 
come to need at Long-Term Capital: the backing of a big firm with 
the deep pockets that can let a trader ride out almost any market 
storm. Throughout the very public bailout of recent weeks, Meriwether 
has remained a man of mystery. He has given only a couple of interviews 
over the years and is rarely seen on the celebrity charity circuit 
in New York, unlike other men and women of fortune on Wall Street. 
He has even bought up most of the photographs taken of him in recent 
years. So what kind of a man is Meriwether? And how could such a reputedly 
brilliant trader who had chalked up so many successes over the last 
25 years wind up nearly bankrupting his firm? Meriwether is not talking 
about his past, present or future. But conversations with people who 
have worked with him in his years on Wall Street reveal a man revered 
by those around him, who nonetheless remained remote, even lonely; 
a man always hunting for the edge that would make his bets _ whether 
in bonds, at the race track or on a Chicago Cubs game _ more calculated 
than wild. He is a man whom co-workers describe as scrupulously honest, 
yet who has been associated with two of the biggest disasters in Wall 
Street history: the 1991 attempt by a Meriwether underling to rig 
the market in two-year Treasury notes and now the fall of Long-Term 
Capital Management. People who have never met Meriwether may remember 
him as the man featured at the start of Michael Lewis' book ``Liar's 
Poker.'' As recounted there, Meriwether supposedly challenged John 
Gutfreund, then the chairman of Salomon Brothers, to up the ante from 
$1 million to $10 million in a game of ``I dare you'' played with 
serial numbers on a dollar bill. Gutfreund, no pansy himself, walked 
away, according to the book. This story almost certainly helped forge 
the romantic view of Meriwether as a Wall Street cowboy, willing to 
make a bet that even his rich boss shrank from. The only trouble is, 
it never happened. According to people who were there, it was not 
Meriwether who made the challenge. It was John O'Grady, a gregarious 
and blustery Salomon partner who ran technical support for the traders. 
O'Grady died in 1989. (Lewis, who is traveling, was not available 
for comment.) According to those who know him well, the story is also 
out of character, because Meriwether made only the most calculated 
of bets, both personally and for the firm. He loved to bet on Chicago 
Cubs games, for example, but would not do so until he had first received 
the weather report to see which way and how hard the wind was blowing 
at Wrigley Field. That way he could better guess how the Cubs home-run 
hitters might do against the opposing pitchers. ``These weren't big 
bets,'' said a person who had knowledge of them at the time. ``He 
just liked to have a lot of things he could analyze.'' More often 
than not, he came away a winner. From Golf Caddie to Club Owner Born 
in Chicago in 1947, Meriwether grew up on the city's South Side. Like 
another famed money manager _ Peter Lynch of Fidelity _ Meriwether 
caddied at a nearby golf course to earn money. Friends believe Meriwether 
is an only child. In 1969, he received a bachelor's degree in business 
from Northwestern University. He earned an MBA from the University 
of Chicago in 1973. The next year he moved to New York, a 27-year-old 
recruit in Salomon Brothers' vaunted management-training program. 
Another member of that program recalls that Meriwether was friendless 
in New York and roomed at a Manhattan athletic club. His first assignment 
was on the desk that arranged financing for the firm's customers, 
called the repurchase or repo department. It was there that Meriwether 
first made his mark. The desk was a fairly limited operation and acted 
as a service function for the government bond desk. ``It had never 
been a money-making proposition,'' said a person who was there at 
the time. ``But John Meriwether turned it into that.'' Meriwether's 
second assignment was to trade short-term agency securities, such 
as those backed by the Federal Intermediate Credit Bank. Aided by 
what people who worked alongside him called a near-photographic memory, 
Meriwether took this backwater of the bond market and made it spectacularly 
profitable. He understood better than others the proper differences, 
or spreads, between the yields on agencies and those on Treasuries, 
which are backed by the full faith and credit of the government. In 
a precursor to this summer's events, spreads on agency securities 
began to widen dramatically in the mid-1970s. What caused the change? 
A near-bankrupt New York City propelled investors out of anything 
that looked at all risky for the relative safety of Treasuries. Meriwether 
knew two things: that the widening in the spreads was an aberration 
and that the agency securities he traded, while not formally backed 
by the government, were still good. He was right. ``He bought every 
single one he could, with the acknowledgment of the senior partners,'' 
recalled a former associate. ``He rode out the bad bumps. Boy, did 
it work well.'' Then, in the late 1970s, Meriwether had an even better 
idea. Through dealing with Salomon Brothers' customers, he saw the 
beginnings of a business that would prove extremely profitable for 
the firm. It was the bond arbitrage business, the ability to capitalize 
on small discrepancies in prices between specific bonds and the newly 
developed futures contracts that were based on them. The business 
was in the infant stages _ a bank in Cleveland was good at it and 
some of the Wall Street dealers were getting better. Why not Salomon 
Brothers? He approached the firm's partners _ it was still a partnership, 
not yet a public company. ``Why should we be executing these trades 
for some of these new arb firms when we can do them ourselves?'' he 
asked. Meriwether was given the go-ahead. Deja Vu, of Sorts, but Different 
The story of Meriwether's first home run on the arbitrage desk is 
eerily similar to the Long-Term Capital story now unfolding. But there 
is a big difference: Meriwether did the bailing out then and he _ 
as the banks and Wall Street firms that poured billions into Long-Term 
Capital now hope to do _ later capitalized on the comeback of a troubled 
portfolio. A big player in the Treasury futures market was a firm 
called J.F. Eckstein &AMP; Co., which had made a big bet that a disparity 
in prices between Treasury bill futures and the underlying security 
would converge. But in a brief two weeks, the prices of the bills 
rocketed. Eckstein, who expected prices to fall, was quickly depleting 
capital, struggling to meet margin calls. ``It was the first real 
period of turmoil in the fledgling financial futures markets, and 
Meriwether understood it,'' Eckstein recalled Thursday. Almost alone 
in the market as a willing buyer, Meriwether took over a good part 
of Eckstein's portfolio. ``The Treasury bills loosened up and the 
prices converged,'' one trader said. ``Meriwether made a fortune.'' 
Eighteen years later Meriwether finds himself in a similar position. 
Unlike Eckstein, however, Meriwether is still running his firm. Looking 
back, it is easy to see how Meriwether might later have been felled 
by thinking that when spreads widen, they always come back. After 
all, with spreads on emerging market debt, junk bonds and mortgage-backed 
securities much wider this spring than in years, they had to narrow, 
didn't they? Once they did, anyone willing to take the gamble would 
generate a windfall. There is one big difference, however. At Salomon 
Brothers, when Meriwether asked for the necessary capital to make 
a huge trade, or additional money to cover it when it temporarily 
lost value, he always got it. At Long-Term Capital Management he was 
not so lucky. Indeed, when he went to his clients in early September 
with hat in hand, he did so still a staunch believer that his money-losing 
trades would come back. Never mind that the paper losses in these 
roughly $90 billion in positions had eroded his capital to just $600 
million from $4.8 billion at the start of 1998. Convinced the trades 
would work out in the end, he asked for more money to shore up his 
capital and allow him to keep the positions. Salomon Brothers might 
have given it to him. But this time, he was turned down. A Natural 
Gambler, but a Careful One Back at Salomon Brothers, Meriwether made 
partner in 1980. As his prominence in the firm grew, so did his ability 
to take greater risk. Indeed, he thrived on it, former colleagues 
say. ``He liked to be involved with chance,'' one said. ``But it was 
always calculated.'' Meriwether was a natural gambler. He would take 
his group to Atlantic City, N.J., roughly twice a year. Department 
meetings would sometimes be held at the Meadowlands race track in 
New Jersey. Meriwether's love of horses extends beyond the track. 
He houses several thoroughbreds on his property in the northern reaches 
of Westchester County. And he is a trustee of the New York Racing 
Association, which operates Belmont Park, Aqueduct and Saratoga Springs. 
Meriwether's wife, the former Mimi Murray, is a rider who trained 
for the Olympic team. In 1982, Salomon Brothers was bought by Phillip 
Brothers, a commodity trading firm known on the Street as PhiBro. 
Some sources who were at Salomon Brothers at the time say one reason 
it took place was that top partners worried about what might happen 
if Meriwether's big trades went bad, wiping out the partnership. With 
the takeover, their own money was no longer on the line backing his 
bets. Yet Meriwether's bigger and bigger bets kept paying off during 
the 1980s, generating bigger and bigger profits for the firm. By today's 
standards, Meriwether did not earn an outsized paycheck at Salomon 
Brothers. In 1989 he took home roughly $8 million; the next year he 
received $10 million. But in 1991, disaster struck. A trader on Meriwether's 
desk, Paul Mozer, tried to corner the market in an issue of two-year 
U.S. Treasury notes. While Meriwether reported the infractions to 
his superiors, the violations were not reported to the Treasury until 
much later. The scandal shook Salomon Brothers to its core. Gutfreund 
and Thomas Strauss, the president, left when Warren Buffett, a big 
owner of Salomon stock, took over to help clean up the mess. Meriwether 
resigned. He later settled an administrative proceeding with the Securities 
&AMP; Exchange Commission in which he neither admitted nor denied 
that he had been negligent as a supervisor. He agreed to a three-month 
suspension and a $50,000 fine. By this time, Meriwether was quite 
wealthy. But it was his investment in his new firm, Long-Term Capital 
Management, that brought him true riches. Although his net worth is 
a secret, former colleagues estimate that at the peak, he was probably 
worth more than $200 million. One Calculation Left Undone For years, 
Meriwether lived humbly. From 1981 until 1993, home was the same small 
apartment on York Avenue, on Manhattan's upper East Side. While he 
lived relatively modestly, he had expensive tastes in golf clubs, 
joining three of the most prestigious in the United States: Shinnecock 
Hills on eastern Long Island, Winged Foot Golf Club in Westchester 
County and Cypress Point, near Pebble Beach, Calif. He is said to 
shoot in the 70s. He even owns a golf course in Waterville, Ireland, 
with some of his partners. Meriwether is a deeply private man who 
lets in only a handful of people. These people are, in return, very 
protective. ``He is a very quiet person, even introverted,'' said 
one former Salomon partner. At Salomon, he was known to be always 
available to people who wanted to bounce an idea off him. ``One of 
the reasons he inspired the loyalty he did was that he would not try 
to take the credit,'' said Stephen Modzelewski, a former colleague 
of Meriwether who now runs a hedge fund. ``Usually the managers would 
steal the ideas of subordinates.'' Among his colleagues, his integrity 
was never in doubt. He would suddenly remember, on occasion, to pay 
up on a bet long since forgotten by everyone else. Stunned by the 
recent unfolding of events at Long-Term Capital Management, former 
colleagues cannot help but wonder how such a bad thing could have 
happened to such a brilliant person. Apparently neither Meriwether 
nor any of his associates, including two Nobel laureates in economics, 
had bothered to do a worst-case scenario on their trades. If they 
had, these people believe, the firm would never have been leveraged 
to the degree that it was. At Salomon, recalled a former trader there 
who worked with Meriwether, ``we would always do what we called the 
`yield-to-worst' calculation, which took into effect the world going 
down.'' Apparently, yield-to-worst was one calculation Meriwether 
either ignored or forgot to do. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>