<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0264 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A warning for those with delicate constitutions: don't eat before 
seeing ``The Mystery of Irma Vep.'' You've never heard of projectile 
laughing? It's a serious concern at ``Irma Vep,'' far and away the 
funniest two hours unfolding anywhere today on a New York stage. The 
revival of the Ridiculous Theatrical Company's 1984 hit, played with 
a consummate sense of timing by that old Ridiculous hand Everett Quinton 
and a bright newcomer, Stephen DeRosa, is just about all one could 
hope for in outrageous Gothic spoofing that incorporates such dainty 
comic devices as leering Egyptian mummies, blood-soaked oil portraits 
and bald men in bustles. Fiends are on the loose in the misty bogs 
(or is that the boggy mists?) of Mandacrest, where much of the play 
takes place. But it is the cockeyed spirit of Charles Ludlam, author 
of ``Irma Vep'' and founder of the Ridiculous, who died in 1987, that 
most assuredly inhabits the chintz-filled English manor house, which 
evokes a thousand atmospheric movie thrillers. This commercial version, 
directed by Ludlam's former partner and longtime co-star, Quinton, 
parts with Ridiculous history, upgrading the company's traditionally 
(and intentionally) slipshod production values from economy to first 
class, yet it retains Ludlam's tart worldview. The jokes are so blatant, 
so wickedly retro, they're almost reprehensible. But even when the 
gags are cheap _ this is a show that manages 11 or 12 laughs out of 
a set of false buck teeth _ they're never flimsy. The play, which 
opened Thursday night at the Westside Theater, is solidly built on 
a lightning-fast series of costume changes by the two actors, who 
equally divvy up eight major roles. Half the fun is anticipating the 
rapid exits and entrances; Quinton, in one amazing instance, plays 
both ends of a tussle in a doorway and DeRosa, in another, runs off 
as Lord Edgar Hillcrest, in tweed waistcoat and riding pants, and 
back on as the chambermaid, in curly wig and voluminous aprons, in 
13 seconds flat. The rest of the pleasure is not so easily quantified. 
It's the reflexive aspect of comedy, the yielding to the power of 
an imagination that bends language and ideas into shapes you can't 
anticipate. How, for instance, does Quinton, playing a double-dealing 
tour guide to the Pyramids, turn ``sarcophagus'' into the most hilarious 
word in the English-Egyptian dictionary? He repeats it three or four 
times in a preposterous Middle Eastern accent, the twist of the tongue 
that forces the emphasis onto the most egregious-sounding syllable. 
(Almost as funny: his describing a potion as being ``form-ED from 
the OO-rine of lynxes.'') ``Irma Vep'' is made up of dozens of such 
blissfully wacky interludes. The story is patched together, a la Frankenstein's 
monster, from this, that and the other; the literary and pop-culture 
references range from the Brontes to Mel Brooks. Lord Edgar's insecure 
second wife, Enid, is now installed as the hostess of Mandacrest, 
and like Joan Fontaine in ``Rebecca,'' she's haunted by the reminders 
everywhere of the first lady of the house, the mysterious Irma Vep, 
whose portrait glares down at her from its honored perch above the 
fireplace. Quinton, wrapped, like a garish Christmas present, in William 
Ivey Long's perfectly insane billowing gowns with clashing collars 
_ all the costumes are divine _ plays Enid as if he were a member 
of British stage royalty who was unaware of being way too big and 
way too old (not to mention way too masculine) for the part. He doesn't 
glide or float across the stage, he flounces, like a panda in a tutu. 
He gives the kind of self-conscious performance that effortlessly 
gets laughs on lines like, ``When I had completed my beauty ritual. 
. . .'' Lady Enid's sparring partner is DeRosa's sweet-and-sour chambermaid, 
Jane, who wears the brittle, private smile of an embittered servant 
bearing some ancient, festering grudge. DeRosa, in the less showy 
performance, is consistently smashing, impressive in everything from 
Jane's country English accent to Lord Edgar's heroic swagger. He's 
Tim Conway to Quinton's Harvey Korman; they're affectionately matched 
pros, challenging one another to play at their peak. Like Conway and 
Korman, too, DeRosa and Quinton, clearly working hard but loving their 
jobs, have to struggle not to break character and crack up. When, 
on the sixth or seventh occasion, Quinton lumbers on as the stableman 
Nicodemus Underwood, he of the wooden leg with visible tree rings 
and teeth so rotten they should be taken into custody by the American 
Dental Association, DeRosa nearly loses it. It's the cumulative effect 
of experiencing Quinton's slobbering efforts to enunciate through 
a set of dentures that don't come close to fitting. John Lee Beatty's 
lavishly tacky sets are elaborate jokes unto themselves, and there 
is a lovely designers' convergence when Lady Enid, in her umpteenth 
costume change, enters wearing the scenery. An Egyptian tomb to which 
Lord Edgar repairs for a wisely gratuitous change of locale is a marvel 
of stage technology and space management: imagine trying to squeeze 
a turbine generator into a studio apartment and you'll have some idea 
of the engineering feat involved in moving a sphinx into an Off Broadway 
playhouse. Along with its secret passageways, werewolves, vampires, 
mummies and sarcophagi, ``Irma Vep'' piles allusion upon allusion. 
Ludlam had a terrific ear not only for the uproarious turn of phrase, 
but also for a precise movie cliche; when a character speaks of the 
``third crowing of the cock'' or declares, ``I'll see you hanged first!'' 
we know instantly what genre, what particular film even, Ludlam has 
in mind. None of this is as easy as it looks. How fleetingly ``Irma 
Vep'' would flame out in less devilishly clever hands and in scenes 
that did not come off like clockwork. Quinton and DeRosa insure that 
the Ridiculous colors are flown as ludicrously as humanly possible. 
And what more meaningful gift could Ludlam bequeath than to leave 
them eternally laughing? PRODUCTION NOTES: `THE MYSTERY OF IRMA VEP: 
A Penny Dreadful' By Charles Ludlam; directed by Everett Quinton; 
sets by John Lee Beatty; costumes by William Ivey Long; lighting by 
Paul Gallo; original music by Peter Golub; sound by One Dream Sound; 
stage manager, Julia P. Jones. Presented by Steve Asher, Richard Frankel, 
Thomas Viertel, Steven Baruch and Marc Routh. At the Westside Theater, 
Downstairs, 407 W. 43rd St., Clinton. WITH: Everett Quinton (Nicodemus 
Underwood, Lady Enid Hillcrest, Alcazar and Pev Amri) and Stephen 
DeRosa (Jane Twisden, Lord Edgar Hillcrest and an Intruder). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>