<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States will have both the political authorization from 
its NATO allies and the military forces in place to use against Yugoslavian 
President Slobodan Milosevic in two weeks if he does not agree to 
remove his special police from the province of Kosovo, to allow relief 
to more than 300,000 refugees and to begin serious negotiations toward 
a political solution, senior U.S. officials said Thursday. The officials 
said they have not delivered a formal ultimatum to Milosevic, but 
have warned him that they are serious this time about military action 
and will take it if he does not comply. Acknowledging that they are 
under new congressional and public pressure because of widely publicized 
atrocities blamed on Serb forces, the officials said that they expect 
Milosevic to heed their warnings and comply with these international 
demands before force is used. But the only way he will do so, the 
officials said, is if he thinks NATO's warnings, this time, are credible. 
And U.S. officials like National Security Adviser Sandy Berger insisted 
Thursday that these new warnings are credible. ``If Milosevic does 
not comply, NATO must be prepared to act militarily, and it will,'' 
Berger said. America would not act alone, he said, but within NATO. 
``And the events and atrocities of the last week or so have quickened 
the pace of our European allies.'' But some U.S. officials acknowledged 
that these threats come very late, after Milosevic has already accomplished 
most of his aims _ beating back the insurgent Kosovo Liberation Army 
and destroying the livelihoods of many of its civilian supporters. 
``You can call this policy by embarrassment, or policy by shame,'' 
said another senior administration official who requested anonymity. 
``But we are at last serious, and our European allies are at last 
serious. This is not an empty exercise, and we do not have our fingers 
crossed behind our backs. Our goal is a diplomatic solution. But if 
there is no legitimate change on the ground, I am confident that we 
and NATO will follow through on these threats.'' To underscore the 
atmosphere of threat, the State Department issued a travel advisory 
warning Americans not to travel to Yugoslavia and asking those Americans 
already there to consider leaving. And the administration's top national 
security officials, Berger, Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, 
Defense Secretary William Cohen and Air Force Gen. Joseph Ralston, 
vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, went to Capitol Hill to 
provide senators a confidential briefing about Kosovo and NATO military 
preparations. ``They laid out the stakes in Kosovo and the importance 
of being prepared to use force and had a serious consultation with 
senators about what decisions may follow in next few days,'' an official 
said. Afterward, Albright told reporters: ``The combined threat of 
the use of force and diplomacy is the best way of proceeding.'' The 
briefing was well-attended, senators said, and the officials laid 
out a strategy that focuses on help for the refugees and diplomatic 
action, but backed up by the use of military force if Milosevic does 
not heed international demands. Sen. Gordon Smith, R-Ore., said that 
the recent media coverage of the latest killings of ethnic Albanians 
``have pushed many of us over the atrocity line.'' He said he told 
the officials: ``With all due respect, it's time to shoot or shut 
up.'' He said he was disappointed that the U.S. position still seemed 
insufficiently aggressive. Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., said he favored 
the use of air power in Kosovo and would support a congressional resolution 
to that effect. And Senate Democratic Leader Thomas Daschle of South 
Dakota said that military action ``may be required'' to enforce diplomatic 
efforts. ``I do believe that some of these people only seem to understand 
diplomacy and its merit once they've seen the alternatives.'' But 
Morton Abramowitz, a former senior State Department official and an 
expert on the Kosovo problem, said he did not expect military action. 
``I'm not holding my breath,'' he said. ``I think every opportunity 
is being given to Mr. Milosevic to pull back. We are trying to get 
the ethnic Albanians and the Serbs to some sort of agreement, but 
what that agreement is remains very unclear, and I'm skeptical that 
all this is the way to any durable settlement.'' U.S. officials said 
the decision to press ahead and ``cock the trigger'' resulted from 
a Cabinet-level meeting of national-security officials two weeks ago 
and a series of conversations with key allied officials, in particular 
the British, French and Germans. The result was a U.N. Security Council 
Resolution that fell just short of specifically authorizing force. 
The Germans and Italians remain more concerned about taking NATO action 
without going back to the Security Council, officials say, while the 
Russians oppose it. But given the new revulsion at Serb tactics stemming 
from the recent massacre of some 19 ethnic Albanians in Kosovo _ producing 
wrenching television film and photographs _ European countries are 
now more willing to use force without going back to the United Nations, 
U.S. officials insisted on Thursday. Recent atrocities have also prompted 
former Republican presidential candidate Robert Dole to urge military 
action in Kosovo, a call recently echoed by other key Republican senators 
like John McCain of Arizona, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and Smith 
of Oregon. On Thursday, NATO asked member nations to provide specific 
military forces for an operation against Serbian or Yugoslav targets. 
The next step, possibly as early as a week from now, would be an activation 
order giving political authorization by NATO members to the NATO commander 
to take military action at any time. But a senior U.S. official said 
that even this activation order would have a waiting period built 
in to it, ``to allow Milosevic to see the handwriting on the wall.'' 
Yugoslav claims that attacks on ethnic Albanians had ended are ``blatantly 
untrue'' said State Department spokesman James Rubin, while his Pentagon 
counterpart, Kenneth Bacon, said that while Belgrade ``says they are 
withdrawing back to the barracks, they are continuing to fight at 
the same time.'' One possible military plan would involve an initial 
wave of air strikes followed by a pause and a warning of crippling 
strikes to follow, an U.S. official said. ``What NATO has planned 
is a graduated series of possible air strikes which could, at the 
high end, involve a very considerable number of airplanes,'' Bacon 
said. ``The goal of the options is to reduce or degrade the Serbian 
military's ability to continue striking the Kosovar Albanians.'' Berger 
and other officials emphasized the urgency of Milosevic's compliance 
before winter sets in and starts freezing refugees to death in the 
mountains. So far, the U.S. government has provided over $47 million 
in financial and material support for refugee support, including $26 
million to non-government aid organizations, who are no longer required 
to work through Serb authorities, officials say. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>