<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
People talk about New York as a city of neighborhoods, and they talk 
about it as a city of changing neighborhoods, but it never really 
occurred to me that my neighborhood would change, not while I was 
gone. I have an apartment just off the New York University campus, 
and I've always thought of the few blocks north and south of Houston 
Street on the west side of Broadway as my home turf, a semi-fashionable, 
semi-shabby tract of the city that allows people like me with ambivalent 
self-images to think of themselves as leaning either way, not to mention 
as younger than we actually are. There have been changes over the 
years, particularly on Prince Street, where the Guggenheim moved in, 
and restaurants like Jerry's and more recently the Cub Room have made 
things considerably hipper, but there was always Fanelli's and the 
Prince Street Bar, where the traffic maintained its comfortable undressiness. 
So it was an interesting thing to do, after subletting my place and 
living in Chicago for a year, when I had occasion to be in New York 
a couple of times this summer, to stay in my home neighborhood but 
not in my home. Instead, I stayed at the Mercer Hotel, the upscale 
hostelry at the corner of Prince and Mercer, owned by Andre Balazs, 
which opened with gradual fanfare between April and August. ``Opening 
Soonish,'' the sign on the outside said when I arrived for my first 
visit at the end of May, somewhat offputting for someone with a reservation. 
Still, I knew from the gossip columns that the likes of Leonardo DiCaprio 
and John Malkovich had already camped there and that Calvin Klein 
had an apartment on the top floor. And it's a small place, just 75 
rooms. So I had that shamefully wonderful feeling of being accepted 
as glamorous enough, even though I had registered under an assumed 
name and couldn't be confused with my namesake, the photographer, 
who is indisputably glamorous enough. And I was amused by the unfinishedness, 
the sense of work in progress, of a happening to be. In May, though 
there was no room service, I was told I could, day or night, take 
the elevator to the basement kitchen for a snack; but at 6 the next 
morning, padding downstairs in socks and a fluffy bathrobe, I woke 
the busboy, who sleepily let me know I'd been misinformed. Even now, 
there are no printed brochures; if you ask for a rate card, you're 
given a hand-written slip of paper. I think $325 a night and up is 
a more startling tariff to confront when it's scrawled in pencil. 
I tried to keep in mind that I was in familiar territory, viewing 
the city experience from a perspective only slightly south of the 
one I was accustomed to, but just entering the lobby made that difficult. 
It is high-ceilinged and, because the outside wall is thickly draped, 
a little dim. It is designed entirely in pale solid colors; not a 
pattern or a stripe to be found on the walls, the retro-plain (but 
comfortable) furniture, the uniforms of the registration personnel 
or the bindings on the books in the bookcases that line one end of 
the room. (Were the books real? I don't know. Perhaps they'd had all 
of Tolstoy rebound in orange and green, but the shelves were too high 
to check.) The one prominent decorative artifact, a glass-mosaic sculpture 
by the Finnish artist Stephan Lindfors, in the shape of a ship's prow, 
hangs from the ceiling in the hall on the way to the guest elevators, 
and it adds to the sense of coolly polished style. Overall, the effect 
is beautifully bland, or maybe blandly beautiful, and I had the distinct 
sense of walking into the pages of a fashion magazine; before I checked 
in, I actually sniffed the air, alert for that powdery perfumey odor 
that I associate with Vogue and Vanity Fair. (OK, it wasn't there.) 
I know this sounds arch and perhaps willfully unsophisticated; I don't 
mean it that way. Well, maybe I do. In any case, the air and manner 
of high fashion just felt strange for a part of the city that I've 
always felt possessive about, and that, with a New Yorker's hubris, 
I presumed was somehow informed by my character. I didn't so much 
join the neighborhood when I moved there a decade ago, I thought, 
as remake it in my image. And though I never felt unwelcome or even 
out of place at the hotel, the lobby struck me as a nexus of glossy 
worlds. It always seemed to be populated by lanky, unshaven, casually 
dressed men just in from the coast and willowy women in snug black 
sheaths on downtown leave from Conde Nast. This shouldn't be surprising 
_ Balazs owns the Chateau Marmont on Sunset Boulevard, after all, 
and his wife is Katie Ford, the modeling monarch _ but to be in the 
midst of it is to shiver in the cool breeze of style. In my experience, 
the neighborhood is warmer than that. Style, of course, does not preclude 
substance. And in the case of the Mercer Hotel, it is there in the 
rooms, which, without renouncing any cool at all, swaddle you in it 
rather comfortably; imagine the snugness of an igloo but with vaulted 
ceilings. The rooms are all different, but even the singles are, by 
New York standards, sizable. They are airy, painted a bright white 
with stunning dark trim around the elegant mirrors, and appointed 
in a pristine luxury. A CD and tape player. A cellular phone and a 
regular one. The cotton sheets were simply the most comfortable I'd 
ever slept on. And the bathrooms are glorious, though not all come 
with tubs, which are worth spending an extra few dollars for. I'm 
not a bath person, maybe because I'm 6 feet tall and have never cottoned 
to tucking my feet in under the faucet. But the tubs are the size 
of Jacuzzis, deep and long and beckoning even to the likes of me. 
And the shower stalls, in brilliant white tile, are roomy enough to 
wash a Volkswagen and appointed with enough heads and shpritzers that 
you don't need to turn around. It occurred to me that this was the 
secret side of high style, and I felt I could get used to it. Maybe 
I didn't have enough to do, but one night I actually took a bath and 
a shower. This was on my last visit, in late summer, and by then the 
Mercer Kitchen had opened _ the restaurant created by Jean-Georges 
Vongerichten, the proprietor of two other bistros uptown, Jean-Georges 
and Vong. (How (italics)does(end italics) he come up with these names?) 
When I finally got cleaned up and went to dinner, I enjoyed myself. 
The menu is hearty and unexotic (though the couscous was notably tasty), 
with emphasis on grilled meats, fish and shellfish. I had chicken; 
my two companions, lobster. Everyone was pleased. With wine and tip 
and a shared dessert, the tab for three came to about $200. The room 
itself is the real attraction, however, a kind of high-end rathskeller. 
Below-ground, brick-walled, with a stairway dividing the room in two 
(communal tables on one side, more private dining on the other) and 
a low bar lining one wall with a softly lighted glass-and-bottle rack 
glowing warmly behind it, the place felt welcoming. With all the tables 
occupied and tipplers two deep at the bar, it felt full but not crowded, 
and with everyone in full conversation, there was a nice, convivial 
buzz; no one had to shout to be heard. I don't know why that happens 
in some places but not others; acoustics, I guess. The room was notable 
for another reason as well; it felt like a hot place, a place to be 
seen. Necks were craning; who's over there? The women, particularly, 
were dressed, if not to be seen, then to be watched. And yet it was 
full of adults, thirtysomethings (and up), rather than twentysomethings, 
which is probably another reason the noise level was manageable, the 
air in the place alive but not urgent. Like Daisy Buchanan's voice, 
the atmosphere had money in it, but it was quieter, more confident 
money than one ordinarily encounters in a lively new joint. It wasn't 
ostentatious; it didn't bug me. The next evening, I went for a walk 
around the neighborhood. I stood outside my old apartment building, 
considering the perplexing metaphor of looking in from the outside 
at a house you own that is being inhabited by someone else. I felt 
a little undone, which is why I walked back to Prince Street to grab 
a beer at my longest-standing haunt, the Prince Street Bar. But it 
was gone. Closed. Apparently for good. So I went back to the bar at 
the Mercer Kitchen. Out with the old, in with the new. There, at the 
bar, I had a conversation with a former model who had recently gone 
back to school. Now in her 30s, she was a freshman, studying literature. 
She lived in the neighborhood. ``Let me show you what I like best 
about this place,'' she said. And she walked into an adjoining alcove 
and pointed at the ceiling, where light was streaming palely in from 
the sidewalk above, through translucent glass. The shoes and legs 
of walkers could be detected; it was a weird feeling of surveillance 
from below. ``It's the same in the bathrooms,'' she said. ``I love 
New York.'' Me, too, I thought. Even from a new perspective. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>