<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0453 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
WASHINGTON _ NATO will have both the political authorization from 
its members and the military forces in place to act against President 
Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia in two weeks, senior U.S. officials 
said Thursday, if he does not stop the violence against ethnic Albanian 
civilians. He must agree to remove his special police forces from 
the province of Kosovo, to allow relief to 300,000 refugees and to 
begin serious negotiations toward a political solution, the Americans 
said. The officials said they have not delivered a formal ultimatum 
to Milosevic, but they have warned him that they are serious this 
time about military action and will take it if he does not comply. 
Acknowledging that they are under new congressional and public pressure 
because of widely publicized atrocities traced to Serbian forces, 
the officials said that they expect Milosevic to comply with these 
international demands before force is used. But the only way he will 
do so, the officials said, is if he thinks NATO's warnings, this time, 
are credible. And U.S. officials like National Security Adviser Sandy 
Berger, insisted on Thursday that these new warnings are credible. 
``If Milosevic does not comply, NATO must be prepared to act militarily 
and it will,'' Berger said. America would not act alone, he said, 
but within NATO. ``And the events and atrocities of the last week 
or so have quickened the pace of our European allies.'' On Thursday, 
the Security Council condemned the atrocities and demanded that the 
Yugoslav government punish those responsible. But some U.S. officials 
acknowledged that the threats of reprisals have come very late, after 
Milosevic has already accomplished most of his aims _ beating back 
the insurgent Kosovo Liberation Army and destroying the livelihoods 
of many of its civilian supporters. ``You can call this policy by 
embarrassment, or policy by shame,'' said another senior administration 
official who requested anonymity. ``But we are at last serious, and 
our European allies are at last serious. This is not an empty exercise, 
and we do not have our fingers crossed behind our backs. Our goal 
is a diplomatic solution. But if there is no legitimate change on 
the ground, I am confident that we and NATO will follow through on 
these threats.'' To underscore the atmosphere of threat, the State 
Department issued a travel advisory warning Americans not to travel 
to Yugoslavia and asking those Americans already there to consider 
leaving. And the administration's top national security officials, 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright; Defense Secretary William Cohen; 
Berger, the national security adviser, and Air Force Gen. Joseph Ralston, 
vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, went to Capitol Hill to 
provide senators with a confidential briefing about Kosovo and NATO 
military preparations. ``They laid out the stakes in Kosovo and the 
importance of being prepared to use force and had a serious consultation 
with senators about what decisions may follow in the next few days,'' 
an official said. Afterward, Albright told reporters: ``The combined 
threat of the use of force and diplomacy is the best way of proceeding.'' 
The briefing was well-attended, senators said, and the officials laid 
out a strategy that focuses on help for the refugees and diplomatic 
action, but backed up by the use of force if Milosevic does not heed 
international demands. Sen. Gordon Smith, R-Ore., said that the recent 
media coverage of the latest killings of ethnic Albanians ``have pushed 
many of us over the atrocity line.'' He said he told the officials: 
``With all due respect, it's time to shoot or shut up.'' He said he 
was disappointed that the U.S. position still seemed insufficiently 
aggressive. Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., said he favored the use of 
air power in Kosovo and would support a congressional resolution to 
that effect. And Senate Democratic Leader Thomas Daschle of South 
Dakota said that military action ``may be required'' to enforce diplomatic 
efforts. ``I do believe that some of these people only seem to understand 
diplomacy and its merit once they've seen the alternatives.'' But 
Morton Abramowitz, a former State Department official and an expert 
on the Kosovo problem, said he did not expect military action. ``I'm 
not holding my breath,'' he said. ``I think every opportunity is being 
given to Mr. Milosevic to pull back. We are trying to get the ethnic 
Albanians and the Serbs to some sort of agreement, but what that agreement 
is remains very unclear, and I'm skeptical that all this is the way 
to any durable settlement.'' U.S. officials said the decision to press 
ahead and ``cock the trigger'' resulted from a Cabinet-level meeting 
of national security officials two weeks ago and a series of conversations 
with key allied officials, in particular the British, French and Germans. 
The result was a Security Council resolution Thursday that fell just 
short of specifically authorizing force. The Germans and Italians 
remain more concerned about taking NATO action without going back 
to the Council, officials say, while the Russians oppose it. But given 
the new revulsion at the recent massacres of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo 
_ producing wrenching television film and photographs _ European countries 
are now more willing to use force without going back to the United 
Nations, U.S. officials insisted Thursday. Recent atrocities have 
also prompted former Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole to 
urge military action in Kosovo, a call recently echoed by other key 
Republican Senators like John McCain of Arizona, Mitch McConnell of 
Kentucky and Smith of Oregon. On Thursday, NATO asked member nations 
to provide specific military forces for an operation against Serbian 
or Yugoslav targets. The next step, possibly as early as a week from 
now, would be an activation order giving political authorization by 
NATO members to the NATO commander to take military action at any 
time. But a senior U.S. official said that even this activation order 
would have a waiting period built in to it, ``to allow Milosevic to 
see the hand writing on the wall.'' Yugoslav claims that attacks on 
ethnic Albanians had ended are ``blatantly untrue'' said a State Department 
spokesman, James Rubin, while his Pentagon counterpart, Kenneth Bacon, 
said that while Belgrade ``says they are withdrawing back to the barracks, 
they are continuing to fight at the same time.'' One possible plan 
would involve an initial wave of air strikes followed by a pause and 
a warning of crippling strikes to follow, a U.S. official said. ``What 
NATO has planned is a graduated series of possible air strikes which 
could, at the high end, involve a very considerable number of airplanes,'' 
Bacon said. ``The goal of the options is to reduce or degrade the 
Serbian military's ability to continue striking the Kosovar Albanians.'' 
Berger and other officials emphasized the urgency of Milosevic's compliance 
before winter sets in and starts freezing refugees to death in the 
mountains. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>