<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981001.0313 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One way to look at the films of Eric Rohmer, in which assorted combinations 
of attractive, cultivated Europeans rearrange their lives amid much 
exquisitely verbalized soul-searching, is to see them as sophisticated 
fairy tales. Shakespearean comedies for the modern professional class, 
they presuppose a highly civilized code of behavior and advanced educational 
level that in a Rohmer film could be taken as universal givens. Despite 
whatever blows fate may deliver the characters, a divine plan usually 
emerges that overrides earlier setbacks. Rational decision-making 
pays off, as does trusting one's deepest intuitions. True love _ or 
the closest thing to it that one can find in this life _ is the ultimate 
reward, but it can't be tasted until every moral quandary has been 
aired and resolved. ``A Tale of Autumn,'' the final chapter in the 
director's ``Tales of the Four Seasons,'' is as sublimely warming 
an experience as the autumn sun that shines benevolently on the vineyard 
owned by the film's central character, Magali (Beatrice Romond). A 
wiry, vital woman in her mid-40s with snapping eyes and an unruly 
bush of hair, Magali, a widowed mother of two grown children, is content 
with her life except for one thing. When prodded by her married best 
friend, Isabelle (Marie Riviere), Magali admits that she longs for 
a relationship with the right man but believes it is too late for 
her to find love. Magali brings all the usual arguments to rationalize 
her resignation. Potentially eligible partners would all want younger 
women, she insists. And living in the country (in the gorgeous Rhone 
Valley region of southern France), she is also isolated. When Isabelle 
suggests placing a personal ad, Magali is revolted by the idea. ``A 
Tale of Autumn'' follows the confusions that ensue when two of Magali's 
friends decide to play matchmaker. Isabelle places a personal ad in 
Magali's behalf, and when a courtly, eminently suitable salesman named 
Gerald (Alain Libolt) responds, she interviews him extensively before 
revealing that she is a merely acting as an unbidden liaison to someone 
else. Meanwhile, Magali's son's girlfriend, Rosine (Alexia Portal), 
whom Magali has taken under her wing, proposes to fix the older woman 
up with her ex-lover and former professor, Etienne (Didier Sandre). 
Both prospective partners are coaxed into attending the wedding of 
Isabelle's daughter. The complications that follow at the outdoor 
reception might be described as Rohmer's elegantly psychologized and 
sublimated version of a classic French farce. It isn't the story but 
the telling that makes ``A Tale of Autumn'' such a rich, emotionally 
satisfying experience. As the five main characters reveal their fantasies 
and fears, each emerges as an astoundingly complex and fully rounded 
human being. By the end of the film, Ms. Romond's Magali, an earthy, 
high-strung woman with an arrogance that masks an underlying shyness, 
has come so alive that you almost see her as a old friend. The film's 
plot, like that of other Rohmer films, is mathematically schematic. 
Even before the equation has been balanced, except for a twist here 
and there, you know where the story will go. But the characters' depth, 
humanity and likability make the expected payoff feel earned. ``A 
Tale of Autumn'' has its labored moments. Especially when the talk 
turns to grapes and late vintages, it is pressing an obvious metaphor 
a bit too aggressively. But the movie evokes such a sensuous atmosphere 
_ bird song, wind, and light and shadow that delineate the season 
and time of day with an astonishing precision _ that you are all but 
transported into Magali's fields, where this year's grapes promise 
to yield an especially fine vintage. ``A Tale of Autumn'' will be 
shown Friday night and Sunday at Alice Tully Hall as part of the 36th 
New York Film Festival. PRODUCTION NOTES: `A TALE OF AUTUMN' Written 
and directed by Eric Rohmer; in French, with English subtitles; director 
of photography, Diane Baratier; edited by Mary Stephen; music by Claude 
Marti; production managers, Francoise Etchegaray and Florence Rauscher; 
produced by Margaret Menegoz; released by October Films. Shown with 
an eight-minute short, Julie Lipinski's ``Theo, Are You There?'' Friday 
night at 6 and Sunday at 9:45 p.m. at Alice Tully Hall as part of 
the 36th New York Film Festival. Running time: 110 minutes. This film 
is not rated. With: Marie Riviere (Isabelle), Beatrice Romand (Magali), 
Alain Libolt (Gerald), Didier Sandre (Etienne) and Alexia Portal (Rosine). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>