<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981001.1700.0438 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dr. James Gordon is a psychiatrist who, along with colleague Susan 
Lord, a nutrition specialist, traveled to Kosovo in recent days. On 
their return, they wrote about the people they saw. Dr. Gordon joined 
us on the line shortly before we went on the air. And we asked him 
if he was looking beyond malnutrition and physical wounds to psychological 
wounds. Yes, I was. And that -- in a sense, that's the most -- at 
least at this point, that's the most pervasive kind of impression 
that one gets. There are tens of thousands of people wandering around 
who literally look like they're in a state of shock. And all of them 
have seen terrible things. And some of them have seen people killed. 
Some of them have seen their -- you know, the homes that they've lived 
in perhaps for generations, or at least homes that they built themselves, 
destroyed. They've come under the threat of death -- not only of death, 
but of destruction of the whole culture. And so there's a feeling 
among many of the people that they don't -- and this is a gross understatement 
-- that they don't know what's hit them. And there's a sense of -- 
and, in a way -- and I just mention this is the article -- they find 
it hard to believe what's happened. And there is a kind of insistence, 
which I -- at first I found a bit curious, but then I began to understand 
more -- that people -- these guys kept saying, `Come see my village.' 
And it was as if they didn't believe that we could believe them, because 
they hardly believed themselves that this had happened to them. And 
really what they're saying is `come see what's left of my village.' 
That's right -- because, of course, the houses -- most of the houses 
and most of the villages were shelled first and then burned. And I 
think this was also particularly horrifying -- you know, it's bad 
enough to see your village destroyed; it's quite something else to 
see police come and burn the houses one-by-one when you and everybody 
else in the village has already left the village and there's nothing 
-- there's no -- absolutely no sort of reason in terms of a -- you 
know, a war against an enemy to destroy your houses that way. There's 
a feeling -- I think there -- they felt this sort of subject to this 
incredible sort of sadistic impulse. In point of fact, you provided 
drawing paper and crayons to some youngsters, didn't you? And I guess 
what you got back were not renderings of themselves, but renderings 
of their homes going up in flames. Right. And that was -- that was 
-- again, it's a kind of technique that we use with kids and with 
adults here in the United States -- that we use, you know, when we 
work with groups around the world -- is we say to people -- sometimes 
we'll say `Draw yourself and draw your most serious problem and then 
draw how you'd like to be.' And then we do that at the beginning of 
our work with them, and we do it again later. With these kids, we 
said, `Draw yourselves.' And every kid -- and they ranged in age from 
about six to fifteen or sixteen -- not one child drew himself or herself. 
They drew -- almost all drew houses. Some -- a few drew country scenes, 
but I would say, oh, nine out of ten of them drew houses. And we said 
to our translator, `Did you get that right? Did you hear that we said 
draw yourself?' And he said, `Yes' He said that -- and that's what 
they -- that's what they're responding to.' But isn't this always 
something we should look for and expect in war zones -- this haunted 
feeling? This fear? I think you're right. It's for me, I have never 
been in a war zone before I've never seen a I've never seen it up-close. 
And I so it was so striking to me. But I think its also somewhat somewhat 
different in a war where, you know, there are houses that are destroyed, 
but the whole world is not destroyed. And that's what, that's what 
we are seeing here. The whole world of these people their houses, 
their crops, their animals are being destroyed, and in a deliberate, 
sadistic, you know, way. It's not, like, `Oh, there's a war going 
on and terrible things happen. And, you know, my neighbor died and 
the house was destroyed, but, you know, there are still a few houses 
left standing.' It's nothing is left. Dr. James Gordon, a psychiatrist 
and director of the Center for Mind-Body Medicine here in Washington. 
He says he, for one, would like to see a major intervention in Kosovo 
-- not so much involving air strikes, but rather intervention with 
large numbers of peacekeepers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>