<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981001.1700.3183 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A 21-year-old graduate from Virginia has just become the first women 
to walk across the United States alone. After almost five months of 
trekking west, she arrived in California on Tuesday. Vlades Ahoke 
caught up with Nickey Krauss on a pay phone in Truckston, Arizona, 
as she was nearing the end of her journey. Nickey Krauss graduated 
from the University of Virginia on May 18, and, the day after, she 
started her walk across the United States. She says she wanted to 
get more first-hand knowledge of the country. I thought I'd learned 
a lot about books, but not a lot about people. I was an English major. 
So I spent four years sitting in front of a computer writing papers. 
And when I decided that traveling was the answer to what I thought 
was a lack of education, I didn't feel like riding in a car was the 
answer to that. 'Cause sitting in front of a computer and sitting 
in a car -- how are they different, really? Nickey Krauss grew up 
in Fairfax, Virginia just outside Washington, D.C. She says almost 
everything she ever heard about America on television, radio, and 
in the movies was bad. Traveling on foot enabled her to see the other 
side of America. Ms. Krauss says throughout her trip total strangers 
invited in to their homes for dinner and an overnight stay. In Shelbeeville, 
Kentucky I met a woman named Bonnie Berksgrey, who I'd never met in 
my life; but she just fell in love with what I was doing. And so she 
started calling every single town I was going through and finding 
either a newspaper or a church member to take me in. So instead of 
sleeping in her tent, Nickey Krauss spent most nights in someone's 
home. She says people often showed up on the desolate stretches between 
prairie towns to bring her water and sometimes droves her backpack 
to her next destination so she could walk lighter. Looking back, Nickey 
Krauss says she probably would not have been able to complete the 
trip if people hadn't helped and encouraged her. She says early in 
the trip she was actually ready to give up at one point. I don't remember. 
I think it was in Kentucky. It was 110 degrees and I ran out of water 
two miles out of town; and I was just really tired. And I wasn't sure 
where I was going to be staying that night. And so I -- I felt like 
I couldn't go on. But she did reach her destination for the night, 
and the local family took her in. Nickey Krauss's trek from Virginia 
through West Virginia, Kentucky, Missouri, Kansas, Colorado, New Mexico, 
and Arizona to California took almost five months. She traveled in 
a T-shirt and short pants, lugging a 25-kilogram backpack with a tent, 
sleeping bag, and cooking supplies. Her father supplied a pair of 
good hiking boots and a cellular telephone for emergencies. Bill Krauss 
says he never attempted to dissuade his daughter from her plan. I 
would question her to really gain an understanding that this is something 
she wanted to do. And when she said, "Yes, dad, I have full intentions 
of doing this," then my only thought was to try and be sure that she 
has as much support as I could give her. Nickie Krauss traveled mostly 
along smaller roads. After the initial exhaustion she got used to 
long hikes so she actually ended her trip ahead of schedule. Last 
week I did a 149 miles. And I've been doing 110-120 miles every single 
week. Do you do more than you... ... these last couple weeks. Ms. 
Krauss says she developed the leg muscles of a football player and 
gained great self-confidence. She says she now feels she can accomplish 
anything she puts her mind to, despite the obstacles. In every part 
of the country I'm in everyone tells me that the next part is worse. 
West Virginia and Kentucky were going to be bad because there -- there 
were going to be no challenges. In Kansas it was going to be hot and 
terrible, but it ends up raining for two weeks and it was wonderful. 
The desert was going to be terrible; there's nothing out there. But 
there are trees every so often. The clouds are amazing; the sky is 
huge. Nickie Krauss, the first woman to walk across America alone, 
started her journey in Charlottesville, Virginia. She ended her walk 
in Needles, California, just across the border from Arizona. She plans 
to write a book about her unique experience. I'm Vlades Ahoke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>