<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981001.1700.1357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some Americans may give little thought to what toothpaste they use 
to brush their teeth, but a growing number now insist on using a toothpaste 
and other personal care products that go along with their natural 
and organic diet. A company base in the northeast corner of the United 
States, Tom's of Maine, has become a leader in providing toothpaste, 
soap and shampoo made from natural substances. It's founder and chief 
executive, Tom Chattel spoke about his company's growth during the 
recent natural products expos in Baltimore, Maryland. Steve Engel 
has more. Tom Chattel and his wife Kate started Tom's of Maine in 
Kennebunck, Maine with a $5,000 loan. As he explains, Mr. Chattel 
made natural cleaning compounds without environmentally harmful phosphates 
and sold them in natural food stores. My wife and I started the business 
in 1970 to make products that were good for the environment and good 
for people and something you could also make money. In 1970, you were 
either for the environment or you were for business, but you were 
not for both. And our idea was to put the two concepts together. Tom 
Chattel's idea of matching ecological sensitivity with capitalism 
became a huge success, with sales currently exceeding $30 million. 
Most of that success is a result of Tom's of Maine's signature product: 
toothpaste. It was so unlike anything that was on the market. And 
yet, it was completely natural. Toothpaste had really been formulated 
by the mid-1970s with so many artificial sweeteners and dyes and preservatives, 
and abrasives that were pretty strong on the teeth. It just seemed 
like a really good product to focus our whole corporate philosophy 
on -- because the things we're putting in our moves with regular commodity 
toothpastes were not the kind of things we're allowing to put in our 
bodies and our foods. So we thought, "Let's be consistent. If we're 
going to eat organic foods and natural foods, why don't we use products 
in the mouth and on the body that are also free of these artificial 
additives?" Tom's of Maine Toothpaste comes in a variety of flavors, 
including spearmint, peppermint, cinnamon, and fennel, the latter 
becoming one of its fastest growing products. In addition to using 
natural ingredients in its toothpaste, the company's packaging is 
made of recyclable materials. As popular as Tom's of Maine Toothpaste 
has become, Tom Chattel eventually faced one of the product's most 
difficult questions, whether to add the cavity-fighting substance 
fluoride. We did not have fluoride in our toothpaste originally because 
you had to get government approval to do that. We were really making 
a product for someone that we thought did not want fluoride in the 
toothpaste. And then as our business grew and we began to get more 
and more customers, we began to get requests for fluoride, especially 
since people would go to see the dentist and the hygienist and they'd 
say, "We want you to use a product that has fluoride." And fluoride 
actually does remineralize and harden the teeth and does do what it 
says it does. Our position on fluoride is that if you use it in a 
toothpaste, it isn't something that's really going to get into your 
system or use it at a level that it's going to cause you any harm. 
To please all its customers, Tom Chattel decided to offer both fluoride 
and non-fluoride toothpaste. Tom Chattel expects his company to grow 
steadily selling products in Canada, the United Kingdom, and Japan, 
as well as the United States. He says the company will remain privately 
held and based not in New York or Los Angeles, but in his beloved 
rustic Maine. We chose to refer to the company as Tom's of Maine because 
we had made a lifestyle choice to move to a region of the world that 
was beautiful and had hard-working, honest people -- people who live 
there because they love the land and the love the water. And so it 
was not a big leap, really, for us to extend that kind of environmental, 
good, basic ethic into the concept of the products. And the company 
identity. So it's really been very advantageous for us. And it's been 
a good decision, and it's also been our place. And people do like 
to relate to something real, human scale, and know where they are. 
Tom Chattel is the founder and chief executive of Tom's of Maine, 
one of America's leading companies producing natural personal care 
products. A graduate of the Harvard University Divinity School, Mr. 
Chattel is also working on a second book about running businesses... 
... with ethical values. I'm Steve Engel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>