<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981001.1700.2696 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I love tea, and now it turns out tea might even be good for me in 
addition to being enjoyable. A hot cup of tea can give us courage 
in the morning, sustenance in the afternoon, and soothing warmth when 
the day is done. But that's not all it can provide. As VOA's Bryan 
Zizlack tells us, there is some evidence that tea may help protect 
us against one of mankind's most dreaded diseases. Over the past three 
decades, we have heard of any number of popular foods and beverages 
that are said to increase the risk of cancer. These conclusions, whether 
based on animal data or human epidemiological studies, vary in their 
soundness. Diet soft drinks with certain types of sweeteners have 
been implemented in cancer. And coffee, that favorite hot beverage 
of the Western hemisphere, has been blamed and exonerated so many 
times, that one is entitled to feel confused. Now we come to tea. 
There is some evidence, gradually making its way into the medical 
literature, that this beverage may be one of the good guys in the 
cancer front. A recent symposium held in New York City explored the 
health benefits of drinking tea. Dr. John Weisberger is a senior member 
of the American Health Foundation, an independent group promoting 
good health through sound nutrition. There has been a lot of research 
done in the Orient, particularly in Japan. And, in that connection, 
the main you're seeing there -- namely, stomach, esophagus, and lung 
-- have been found to be lower in regular tea drinkers. They also 
found that heart attacks are lower in regular tea drinkers. What's 
more, laboratory animal studies seem to confirm that tea somehow reduces 
the odds of developing cancer. They have animal models for many kinds 
of cancer like colan and breast and prostate. And every time tea was 
used as a on water. So that one can say at this point that tea is 
likely to be a beneficial beverage in lowering the risk of most cancers. 
So what is it about tea that makes it a cancer preventer? Dr. Weisberger 
says that tea contains anti-oxidants -- natural chemicals that block 
the activity of so-called free radicals, which are cancer causing 
substances formed in the body during normal metabolism. In that respect, 
the beneficial natural chemicals in tea resemble Vitamin C and E, 
as well as the beta carotene found in carrots, broccoli, and leafy 
green vegetables. They're good for you. But studies of tea drinking 
in Asia, of course, focused principally on green tea, the local preference. 
Dr. Weisberger says that the role of black tea in cancer prevention 
has not been studied as much. But, where it has been, it's been found 
to have a beneficial effect. It turns out in the last five years we 
have studied, on a comparative manner, green tea and ordinary black 
tea that is available in any supermarket. And black tea is just as 
efficacious in cancer prevention as is green tea. They are absolutely 
identical for the good reason they come from the same tea leaf -- 
the same plant. So if tea is an effective cancer preventer, how much 
of it do we need for meaningful protection? And is it possible to 
get too much of a good thing? Dr. Weisberger says not to worry. Based 
on the anti-oxidant content of the average cup of tea, I suggest that 
five cups or more of tea are desirable. Tea is not at all toxic. So 
10 cups a day's OK as well. Dr. John Weisberger, senior member of 
the American Health Foundation, on the cancer preventive aspects of 
tea. I'm Bryan Zizlack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>