<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981001.1700.2468 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meanwhile, U.S. intelligence officials were claiming to have foiled 
a plot by Islamic extremists to bomb another U.S. embassy -- this 
time in Uganda. According to the reports, agents of the U.S. Central 
Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation worked 
with Uganda's anti-terrorism squad to uncover the plot. The officials 
claimed two of the twenty suspects arrested were associates of Osaman 
Ben Laden. And another arrest was made in Texas last week of a man 
charged with lying about his association with Mr. Ben Laden. But terrorism 
expert Joe Trento of the Washington-based National Security News Service 
says the arrests have barely made a dent in the Ben Laden terrorist 
network. The arrests are messages we're sending that we can track 
his money -- and we can track his operations. But the fact of the 
matter is he expected that. This is a guy who survives attacks within 
factions of the Islamic community repeatedly. And so for him to have 
an associate arrested in Texas, as was the case, or another associate 
arrested in Africa, is not going to affect him much. They'll just 
be replaced. He has plenty of followers. And he has plenty of support 
from Middle Eastern governments. You know, I hope we don't get into 
a situation where we treat -- where we treat every terrorist act as 
coming from Ben Laden -- because we'd be deluding ourselves. And also 
we'd get into a situation where you've pinned everything on one serial 
killer and then four years later it all starts up again. The reality 
is we don't know who the terrorists are. We don't know who he's recruited. 
I mean, what he does and what other terrorists do -- including domestic 
terrorists -- are they recruit zealots to carry out their mission. 
Ben Laden doesn't carry out missions; it's zealots who work for him. 
But he did threaten, or others have threatened, that there were going 
to be some more attacks after the ones in Africa, and there haven't 
been. Is that because of the successes of U.S. intelligence, or is 
there another reason? You're giving more credit to U.S. intelligence 
than they deserve. I think the real credit ought to be going to the 
State Department's diplomatic security service. They're the ones who 
actually prevent these attacks. The facilities that they're most likely 
to target are the embassies -- because they're the most vulnerable, 
and you're going to get the biggest amount of Americans. The next 
level of facilities is to target an airport when Americans are leaving 
for a flight. And those airports aren't likely to be in very far away 
places. They may be in Paris; they may be in Hong Kong. They may be 
in places that -- where Americans congregate on vacation or on business. 
There won't be an early warning. They'll be a massive attack where 
security is weak. And Ben Laden is not going to risk losing more cells, 
more organizations by attacking when the U.S. is at the height of 
its readiness. What he may do is wait until the impeachment talks 
or the impeachment trial come on -- until Americans' attention is 
elsewhere. So in your opinion the threat has not gone away? The threat 
is higher now than it's ever been. There have been more activity in 
regards to terrorism towards Americans than there ever has. And we 
are less prepared for it than we ever have been. Part of the problem 
is because most of the terrorists have a history of being formally 
involved with U.S. intelligence. You know, these are people we train 
and recruit. And when they get mad at us they decide to get even. 
And that's what's happened with Ben Laden. It's really very simple. 
Joe Trento of the Security watchdog group, the National Security News 
Service. That's our update on the terrorist threat. For "Dateline," 
I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>