<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981001.1700.0816 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Leading supporters of the 1997 ban on anti-personnel land mines announced 
today a new initiative to set up a monitoring system designed to track 
compliance and to persuade reluctant governments to join the treaty. 
The ban would go into effect next March, faster than any major treaty 
in history, but without the signature of the United States. VOA correspondent 
Elaine Johansen reports from New York. One-hundred-thirty countries 
have signed the land mine treaty since December -- 45 governments 
have ratified it -- more than enough to give the ban legal force. 
But anti-land mine activists are not resting on their laurels. At 
a news conference at the United Nations, deputy secretary general 
Luise Pershet said the treaty itself is simply the first battle of 
a long struggle. And we know where the next two battles will be fought 
-- namely, in the effort to remove the millions of land mines that 
continue to kill, maim, and sow terror amongst the weakest and most 
vulnerables of our world -- and in the effort to universalize the 
treaty and bring every nation and every people into compliance with 
this convention of conscience. The United States is a special target 
of the treaty supporters. Washington says it is not ready to sign 
just yet. American Jodie Williams, founder of the International Campaign 
to Ban Land Mines, and the recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize last 
year, says she is especially disappointed because the United States 
at one time was a leader of the ban the mine movement. It's disturbing 
that even though the U.S. has said they will sign by 2006 -- what 
they're saying is they'll sign if they have an alternative. And so 
far they have not shown a real vigorous attempt to find an alternative. 
The United States uses land mines on the Korean Peninsula to defend 
the South against potential aggression by North Korea. U.S. military 
officials say they need to have another viable military option before 
agreeing to remove them. All of the Western hemisphere except for 
the United States and Cuba has signed the land mine ban. All of NATO 
has signed it except for the United States and Turkey. Over 40 countries 
in Africa and 17 in the Asia-Pacific region, including Japan, have 
also signed. Conspicuous under-represented is the Middle East, which 
is heavily mined. Experts say one-half of the number of land mines 
strewn around the world -- about 50 million mines -- have been laid 
in the Middle East. The U.S.-based International Campaign to Ban Land 
Mines has activated over 1,000 sympathizers around the world to rouse 
public support. It also plans to set up the first non-governmental 
tracking system to monitor compliance with a major arms control treaty. 
The land mine ban calls for the destruction of stockpiles within four 
years and the elimination of mines already in the ground within ten. 
Elaine Johansen, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>