<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981001.1700.2156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In recent weeks, U.S. and European intelligence agencies have mounted 
an international effort to break the terrorist network suspected of 
the August bomb attacks on two U.S. embassies in East Africa. The 
officials say they've made several arrests and thwarted other bomb 
plots against American targets. Updating the terrorist threat is the 
subject of today's "Dateline." Here's Pamela Taylor. On August 7, 
terrorist bombs destroyed the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. 
268 people died in those attacks. Two weeks later the United States 
struck back, launching cruise missiles on suspected terrorist sites 
in Afghanistan and Sudan. Both sites were suspected to be connected 
with the dissident Saudi terrorist known as Osama Ben Laden. At a 
recent conference on terrorism in Washington, experts debated whether 
the U.S. strike was an effective response. We have more in this report 
from VOA's Kenneth Schwartz. At a recent panel discussion in Washington 
sponsored by the privately-run International Association for Counterterrorism 
and Security Professionals, three experts agreed that intelligence, 
military, and legal measures are the best ways to fight terrorism. 
Andrew McCarthy was chief prosecutor of World Trade Center bomber 
Sheik Omar Abbul Rockman. While criminal prosecution under certain 
conditions can be an important weapon against terrorism, it is not 
the best and it cannot be the most important one. Patrick Eddington 
is a former analyst with the Central Intelligence Agency. The Islamic 
fundamentalists that we are dealing with here are not simply interested 
in exacting a price from the United States for its involvement in 
world affairs. They are, in essence, opposed to our very civilization 
and our way of life. And I think it's very, very important to understand 
that. We have not faced an opponent like this, in my view, since at 
least the Second World War. But even a successful military attack 
against tangible targets cannot stop terrorism's vast financial network. 
Steven Emerson is an investigative journalist and an authority on 
radical Islamic extremism. The larger picture of how militant Islamic 
groups use front companies and that web of charitable and commercial 
organizations to launder their activities, commingling legitimate 
and illegitimate activities, is, I believe, the foremost challenge 
for U.S. domestic law enforcement and law enforcement overseas. Although 
the United States can legally seize the U.S. assets of terrorists, 
very little has actually been frozen -- because many of those assets 
are listed under fake names, clothed as religious charities, or buried 
in the stock market. The panelists delegitimizing militant Islamic 
theology, recognizing terrorists before they act, and breaking their 
broad financial network is the United States' most critical challenge 
for the 21st Century. VOA's Kenneth Schwartz reporting from Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>