<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981009.1830.1396 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" tonight at senator John Glenn 
now known as payload specialist John Glenn. The space shuttle has 
become something of a routine the last few years, going up and coming 
down without much serious attention. But the launch of the shuttle 
"discovery" on October 29th, will be different. It will be carrying 
an American hero. John Glenn has been in this position before -- 36 
years ago. It was a very different world in 1962, the cold war was 
at its peak. And the Russians had blasted ahead in the race for space. 
"They taunted us," Glenn said at the time, "that Americans were going 
to sleep under a Soviet Moon." The Burden John Glenn bore was enormous, 
to get America back in the race. The first ten tries at Glenn's flight 
were aborted or had to be canceled. Glenn finally climbed aboard friendship 
7 for real on February 20th, 1962. Got speed, John Glenn. The view 
is tremendous. Glenn circled the globe three times, the first American 
to do so. Everything's A-okay. It wasn't. Glenn was in trouble. His 
heat shield was not right. He risked burning up on his journey back 
to earth. America held its breath. John Glenn, who was 40, emerged 
a hero. America was one giant step closer to getting to the Moon before 
the Russians. The book, and later, the movie, "the right stuff" elevated 
Glenn's story to legend. That wasn't too bad. Glenn, himself, defined 
"the right stuff" as a willingness to go to the edge, which at 77-years-old, 
is his next stop. At 77, John Glenn will be the oldest person ever 
in space. It's an age when most people have already retired. In fact, 
John Glenn, himself, is retiring from the Senate this year, leaving 
after representing Ohio for 24 years. So why, after such an illustrious 
career, is he taking what is certainly a considerable risk? It's a 
question many people are asking senator Glenn and NASA. Here's ABC's 
Ned Potter. Glenn and his six crew mates suited up just as they plan 
to three weeks from now, heading out to pad 39b, squeezing into "discovery" 
for a practice countdown. Through all the months of launch preps, 
it's been obvious that John Glenn is having a wonder full time. Well, 
I am. And I'll tell ya, I've never worked harder in my life. Indeed. 
He's been dunked and probed, he's been spun in a centrifuge and forced 
to learn, for the first time, how to use a lap top computer. So now 
you go to "file" and pick "save as." But ask him anything about himself 
and he quickly changes the subject to all the aging research he touts 
as his reason for flying. Too often you get into the human aspect 
of this, and you don't get into the scientific stuff that gets into 
everybody's house all over the country. Glenn will be tested for muscle 
wasting, loss of bone minerals and balance problems, all of which 
afflict astronauts and the elderly as well. He will be wired up for 
a sleep experiment, his brain waves, breathing, and heart rate monitored 
to see if the hormone melatonin helps him sleep more deeply. And then 
when the secondhand came up, I'd go to 26. Most scientists say the 
experiments are well designed, but in some cases, that's because thewere 
done ral researchers say the only found out their experiments were 
flying when they heard Glenn was. He's an astronaut, he's an American 
hero, he's in great shape, he's a stud. I mean, this is the guy you'd 
want to fly the first time in space. Do scientists expect to learn 
very much from this 77-year-old man? Many of them, frankly, say not 
really. But by and large, the public says, what? 36 years ago Glenn 
had the courage to fly in space in this tiny capsule and if he wants 
to go up again, they say, God speed. In an ABC News poll, only 32% 
thought Glenn was flying mainly for science. 34% thought it was mainly 
public relations for NASA. But 58% said either way, it was good enough 
for them. And the space program is about more than science. It's about 
dreaming, dreaming the impossible dream. Whatever Glenn hopes his 
flight does, he personally is still a symbol of American heroism. 
So when he challenges the sky again, it stirs something people haven't 
felt in a long time. Ned Potter, ABC News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>