<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981009.1830.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. It's the president against the Congress and they're 
fighting about the budget. Indeed over the weekend they'll have to 
fined some way to agree on a Bill to keep the government operating. 
This is a battle we've seen before. What we have not seen, at least 
since Richard Nixon, is an old-fashioned budget battle taking place 
in the shadow of an impeachment investigation. There is a touch of 
the surreal right now in Washington. The question is can the government 
do its job while the president is fighting to keep his job. ABC's 
Sam Donaldson is at the White House. Charlie, both republicans and 
democrats spent the day trying to convince the public that the other 
side is to blame for once again coming down to the wire with so much 
left to be done befor go. House democrats marched over to the Senate 
to point up the Senate's failure to pass the democrat's patient's 
Bill of rights, actually minority leader, Daschle, made clear, the 
republicans failure. Our colleagues have thwarted us at every turn. 
They have ignored how real people get hurt. For their part, the republicans 
complained that it is President Clinton who has ignored the people's 
business. He has been disengaged all year. I think he met with his 
cabinet twice, he has not called the republican majority leadership 
down to the White House once this year, and now at the very end of 
the session he is deciding to be engaged. "not so fast," replied the 
president, flanked down at the White House by fellow democrats, "not 
so fast." What is the record to date of the majority? They have killed 
the Bill to reform the way we treat tobacco and to protect our children 
from the dangers of tobacco. They killed campaign finance reform. 
They killed the minimum wage. "now," said the president, "the Congress 
must pass certain legislation beginning with an education Bill, a 
new agriculture measure to replace the one he just vetoed as inadequate. 
The $18 billion for the international monetary fund and, of course, 
final money for several government departments whose appropriation 
bills have never been passed. Late today, Congress moved toward keeping 
the government open over the weekend in an effort to settle all this. 
The president challenged Congress today to stay in session until it 
passes his education legislation. The republicans replied they would 
stay until the work was done. The fact is, Charlie, legislators of 
loathe parties can't watd to get out of town, in order to explain 
to the voters why it is so little got done and why it is that that's 
9 other side's fault. Sam Donaldson at the White House. Thanks very 
much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>