<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981009.1100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The models in stiletto heels marched down the runway to a techno beat, 
while laser rays highlighted the pretty clothes of the latest Versace 
collection. The clothes, presented Friday night, still had the Versace 
sexy edge, but they were softer and more delicate than in past seasons. 
Pretty slip gowns, a loosely fitted jacket, slits that hint rather 
than holler and quiet pastel shades all combined to create a good 
spring 1999 feeling. A year after her brother Gianni was killed by 
a gunman outside his Miami Beach mansion, Donatella, who took up the 
label's designing torch, says she feels ``relaxed, if not happy''. 
The clothes reflect this mood. Aside from the more off-the body shapes, 
the outfits are more about Donatella's love for fabric experimentation 
than shock styles. In her years working beside her brother, Donatella 
was always searching for new fabrics. This round she mingles silk 
with cashmere and steel, punctures cowhide, and combines canvas and 
organza to create a basket weave effect. There are plenty of short 
styles in the new collection, from the silk-and-steel pleated skirts, 
to the linen and stretch net cotton gauze high-collared mini dresses, 
but they are demure rather than daring. Footwear remains ultrahigh. 
The models had a hard time negotiating the fast-paced runway in their 
6-inch stiletto sandals. But Donatella, whose fiery personality detracts 
from her small stature, is rarely caught without them. Delicate floral 
prints, and wisps of pastel shades along with yellow, aquamarine pink 
and turquoise lend to the upbeat mood of the collection. Gianfranco 
Ferre plans to mark his 20 years as a designer with a big bash in 
his new glass-encased digs near Milan's trendy Brera area Friday night. 
His latest spring-summer show presented Thursday was a self ode to 
his talent. The bearded and rotund architect-turned-designer went 
to fashion town. To mark his passion for leather he sent out models 
in aggressive short black numbers, with soaring hemlines, mean slits 
and bold metal studs. To herald his love of transparency he offered 
a fishnet jumpsuit clinging to a nude body, covered by nothing more 
than a stiff band around the hips. To sing the praises of his structured 
fashion he created ball gowns in shimmery, copper-colored velvet and 
taffeta, worthy of the most sumptuous 19th-century ball. Interspersed 
throughout the collection was the famous white Ferre shirt, with stiff 
collar, wide cuff, and extra long tails. Earlier Thursday, the inventive 
Dolce and Gabbana duo produced a colorful show dedicated to the seaside. 
Fabric treated with laser beams created wavelike effects on slithering 
evening gowns and shimmering tube dresses worn with tiny cashmere 
shrugs, while rubberized silk was hand painted with a school of sardines 
or golden palm trees. The favorite summer shades were green and blue 
made to sparkle like the sun dancing off the water. The nine-day ``Moda 
Milanese'' preview presentations for the spring-summer 1999 end Saturday 
with the Giorgio Armani collection. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>