<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981009.0296 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the angry protests of past years a faint memory, Taiwan's fourth 
nuclear power plant is nearly a quarter complete, the state-owned 
Taiwan Power Co. said Friday. The embattled plant is on schedule to 
reach full output in July 2004, adding 2,700 megawatts to Taiwan's 
23,763 megawatts of installed capacity, said Lin Chu-wan, director 
of the project in coastal Kungliao township, about 40 kilometers (25 
miles) east of Taipei. On the project site, giant backhoes load soil 
and shale into trucks from a 27 meter- (89 foot)-deep hole where the 
plant's No. 2 reactor will sit. Massive concrete jacks sit on the 
beach where they will become part of a breakwater for the plant's 
landing dock and cooling water intake station. Corrugated steel storehouses, 
offices and dormitories make up the 22 percent of the total project 
completed. So far, 25.1 billion Taiwan dollars (U.S. dlrs 765 million) 
of the total 169 billion Taiwan dollar (U.S. dlrs 5.1 billion) budget 
has been spent, with the plant's two reactors yet to arrive. Outside 
the plant, once prominent protest banners placed by opponents from 
the anti-nuclear lobby and local community have been removed or blown 
away by the sea winds. Angry pickets displaying pictures of the Russian 
power plant disaster at Chernobyl and victims of nuclear bombs are 
long gone. The plant originally was conceived in 1980, but its budget 
was frozen twice by the legislature, where opponents claimed reliance 
on nuclear power was dangerous and unnecessary. Amid sometimes violent 
protests by Kungliao residents and anti-nuclear groups, the budget 
was restored and General Electric of the United States awarded the 
reactor bid in May 1996. Since then, opposition has fallen considerably 
as politicians drop anti-nuclear arguments as a strategy for mobilizing 
supporters _ though Taipower officials say they expect another round 
of protests to accompany general elections in December. Meanwhile, 
Kungliao's some 10,000 residents are coming to realize the advantages 
of a compensation package offering them 1 percent of total energy 
sales from the plant annually, said Wu Ching-tung, a former township 
chief. ``People have calmed down, and for this area, the plant will 
mean a lot,'' said Wu, seated at one of the many seafood restaurants 
that line the coastal road. Some disputes remain though, especially 
with local fishermen over compensation for alleged damage to fish 
stocks. And the local council has refused to accept compensation money 
paid by Taipower, leaving the funds sitting with the township power 
authority. Taiwan imports 96 percent of its energy needs, which Taipower 
officials say will grow with the island's expanding population and 
economy. Nuclear power is still the cheapest way to produce electricity, 
and now furnishes 21.6 percent of the island's power, against 59.3 
percent for coal- and oil-fired power plants and 18.1 percent for 
hydroelectric plants, said Taipower spokesman Chen Mu-lin. In a recent 
statement, Premier Vincent Siew said Taiwan would not increase the 
proportion of energy from nuclear power or add new reactors before 
2020. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>