<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981009.0790 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Imports to Russia plunged 45 percent in September because most people 
can no longer afford them, not even necessities such as medicines, 
milk and sugar, the government said Friday. Russia depends on imports 
for almost 80 percent of its consumer goods _ more than almost any 
other country in the world _ but the latest economic crisis has sent 
prices soaring and the ruble tumbling. The country hasn't experienced 
any serious shortages, but store shelves can be empty for days at 
a time. The government is planning to drop or lower import duties 
on basic foods such as meat, butter and grain in a bid to restock 
them. Meanwhile, the speaker of the Russian parliament said he is 
concerned that the government has not yet come up with a comprehensive 
plan to deal with the economic crisis that erupted nearly two months 
ago. ``We are not hurrying the government, but we are a bit worried 
by the delay in presenting the anti-crisis program,'' Gennady Seleznyov, 
a Communist who is as speaker of the State Duma lower house, told 
Russian news agencies. Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov has been in 
office since Sept. 11, but his Cabinet is still formulating an economic 
rescue plan. The government has said it will be announced before Oct. 
20. The Kommersant business newspaper said Friday it had learned one 
proposal under consideration: minting a gold coin to raise money to 
pay overdue wages and pensions, as well as debts on government bonds. 
Kommersant said 20 metric tons (22 tons) of the Central Bank's 500 
metric tons (550 tons) of gold reserves would be used in the project 
to raise 5 billion rubles (dlrs 316 million). The coins would have 
a face value of 1,000 rubles (dlrs 63.21) and 5,000 rubles (dlrs 316) 
but would contain only 10 rubles (63 cents) and 100 rubles (dlrs 6.30) 
worth of gold respectively, the newspaper said. Primakov reiterated 
that the government's economic plan hinges on whether the International 
Monetary Fund releases the next installment on a dlrs 22.6 billion 
loan negotiated before Russia's long-standing economic problems developed 
into a full-fledged crisis in mid-August. ``If we get the installment 
promised by the IMF, there will be one turn of events, but if we don't 
get it, another, alternative version of events will be adopted,'' 
he told reporters after meeting with the president of the European 
Union Commission, Jacques Santer. Primakov did not say what those 
alternatives would be, but Russian media have widely reported they 
will include printing more money. Russia badly needs foreign aid to 
pay off a mountain of debts, but international lenders have not been 
willing to provide money until they know the contents of Russia's 
economic program. Finance Minister Mikhail Zadornov said Friday the 
IMF told him during meetings in Washington this week it wants the 
government to actually implement the program before it will release 
more money, the Interfax news agency said. Meanwhile, the State Statistics 
Committee said Friday that overall imports fell 45.4 percent in September 
compared to a year earlier, but in some categories the decline was 
even more dramatic. Pharmaceutical imports were down 71 percent, while 
milk and sugar imports both fell more than 80 percent. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>