<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981009.0803 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) _ U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke tried to 
wring concessions out of a defiant Slobodan Milosevic on Friday, holding 
new talks aimed at getting the Yugoslav president to comply with international 
demands on Kosovo or face NATO airstrikes. While top Western officials 
declined to call it Milosevic's last chance to avoid attack, U.S. 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright had warned in dispatching Holbrooke 
back to Belgrade that ``time is all but gone'' for a peaceful settlement. 
Holbrooke left the talks after three hours for consultations by phone 
with Albright. Milosevic, meanwhile, issued a statement that was less 
bellicose than in previous days. He said he thinks the world will 
believe that he has complied with demands to massively draw down troops, 
making the ``belligerent attempts'' of a NATO strike unnecessary and 
leading to a return of peaceful attempts to solve the crisis. Momentum 
was still building toward military action. Gen. Wesley Clark, supreme 
allied commander in Europe, said his forces are moving ahead with 
final preparations for an attack. Speaking in Naples, Italy, he questioned 
why Milosevic would want to ``risk the ravages of armed conflict and 
the destruction of his own country.'' Divisions remained among the 
16 NATO allies on the use of force, however. Germany and Italy, among 
others, are reluctant to proceed without a stronger legal basis for 
action. Alliance ambassadors failed at a meeting in Brussels on Friday 
to pressure Russia into dropping its opposition to airstrikes. Holbrooke, 
who arrived from London where he met with officials of the six-nation 
Contact Group on the Balkans, said before Friday's talks that ``the 
situation remains just as serious at it has been before.'' His fourth 
round of talks with Milosevic in five days was to continue in the 
evening. Hundreds of people have been killed and upwards of 300,000 
driven from their homes since Milosevic launched a crackdown Feb. 
28 against the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army, which is fighting 
for independence from Serbia, the main republic of Yugoslavia. Milosevic 
has defied U.N. orders to withdraw substantial forces from the province, 
maintaining they are needed to prevent new attacks by KLA ``terrorists.'' 
There was no sign he was ready for concessions. The Serbian government, 
effectively under his control, put into effect Friday a harsh decree 
tightening state control over companies and independent media and 
banning the rebroadcast of foreign news broadcasts in Serbian. The 
decree, announced earlier this week, broadens government authority 
and institutes punishment for behavior deemed anti-patriotic. The 
international demands Holbrooke was presenting to Milosevic are an 
immediate end to hostilities, a withdrawal of forces and heavy armaments 
to pre-March levels, allowing unhindered work by humanitarian organizations, 
cooperation with the International War Crimes Tribunal, facilitating 
refugees' return to their homes, and the start of negotiations with 
ethnic Albanian leaders on possible self-rule. In addition, Holbrooke 
was expected to press for an international monitoring force to be 
allowed to oversee compliance. The KLA announced a unilateral cease-fire 
throughout Kosovo starting Friday _ a move that will add to the pressure 
on Milosevic to reciprocate. There were no immediate reports on new 
gunfire or shelling. Milosevic has refused to openly declare a cease-fire, 
even though there has been no major fighting in Kosovo during the 
past week and the KLA has been largely routed. He considers the Kosovo 
rebels ``terrorists and bandits,'' and any cease-fire on his part 
would legitimize them as a negotiating partner, one of his associates 
said on condition of anonymity. The Serbian and Yugoslav governments 
showed little sign that they are prepared to bow to international 
pressure, apparently gambling that Russian opposition to a NATO attack 
will persuade key alliance members, including Germany and Italy, to 
block any action. Dismissing any talk of a rift within NATO, Albright 
said she thinks the alliance will agree on an activation order ``in 
the next few days'' that would authorize an attack. On Friday, the 
NATO allies and Russia jointly urged Milosevic to end the violence 
in Kosovo, but Russia remained opposed to using force. A NATO official 
who spoke on condition of anonymity said the allies and Russia agreed 
that ``we need to give Holbrooke some time now.'' The allies are warning 
that they envision not just one strike against Yugoslavia but a series 
of air attacks, gradually intensifying. ``We have made it perfectly 
plain that NATO's planning is not for one rap over the knuckles,'' 
British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook told the British Broadcasting 
Corp. on Friday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>