<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981009.1122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A senior U.S. trouble-shooter pressed President Slobodan Milosevic 
on Friday to avoid NATO attack by accepting international peace terms 
on Kosovo, and the alliance's top general urged him to stop toying 
with Yugoslavia's survival. Divisions remained among the 16 NATO allies 
on the use of force, despite the tough talk from Gen. Wesley Clark, 
the American supreme commander of NATO. Italy and Greece, among others, 
are reluctant to proceed without a mandate from the U.N. Security 
Council, where Russia and China are opposed or seeking a legal basis 
for such a strike. Still, in dispatching U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke 
back to Belgrade, U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright warned 
Milosevic that ``time is all but gone'' for a peaceful settlement. 
After the first round of talks Friday, Milosevic called NATO threats 
of airstrikes ``belligerent attempts'' to solve the Kosovo problem, 
adding that he favors negotiations. The talks resumed later in the 
night. Clark said his forces were moving ahead with final attack preparations. 
Speaking in Naples, Italy, he questioned why Milosevic would want 
to ``risk the ravages of armed conflict and the destruction of his 
own country.'' Meeting in Brussels, Belgium, NATO allies searched 
for consensus for a strike that would allow them to proceed without 
the direct blessings of the U.N. Security Council. But the alliance 
failed in its effort to pressure Russia into dropping its opposition 
to airstrikes. ``We must not allow NATO strikes,'' Russian President 
Boris Yeltsin was quoted as saying in Moscow Friday. ``We want to 
achieve a political, peaceful solution without the use of military 
force, and, I think, we shall succeed.'' Greek forces will not participate 
in any possible NATO military intervention against Yugoslavia over 
Kosovo, the government said Friday. But Greek Prime Minister Costas 
Simitis said a decision on intervention may nonetheless be taken as 
early as this weekend. Hundreds of people have been killed and tens 
of thousands have been driven from their homes since Milosevic launched 
a crackdown Feb. 28 against the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation 
Army, which is fighting to wrest Kosovo province from Serbia, the 
main republic of Yugoslavia. Milosevic has defied U.N. orders to withdraw 
substantial forces from the province, maintaining they are needed 
to prevent new attacks by Kosovo Liberation Army ``terrorists.'' Holbrooke 
arrived from London, where he met with officials of the six-nation 
Contact Group on the Balkans. He said that movement toward authorizing 
the use of force by NATO continues ``in a sustained and intense manner.'' 
``The situation remains just as serious at it has been before,'' he 
said shortly before the start of his fourth meeting with Milosevic 
in five days. In Pristina, Kosovo's provincial capital, cafes were 
full, with people appearing to make the most of what could be the 
last few days of relative peace. ``I am not afraid,'' said Jehona 
Xhaferi, 25, an ethnic Albanian. ``Maybe that's crazy, but I see it 
as the finishing phase of everything,'' she said, alluding to the 
months of Kosovo turmoil. The international demands Holbrooke was 
presenting to Milosevic included an immediate end to hostilities and 
a withdrawal of forces and heavy armaments to levels before March, 
before the government crackdown on Kosovo started. In addition, Holbrooke 
was expected to press for an international monitoring force to be 
allowed to oversee compliance. The KLA announced a unilateral cease-fire 
throughout Kosovo starting today, a move that will add to the pressure 
on Milosevic to reciprocate. But Serbian media reported at least five 
KLA breaches of their cease-fire Friday. They said Serbian police 
and ethnic Albanians loyal to the Serbian government were attacked, 
but there were no injuries. The KLA said it was government troops 
who were on the offensive. In a statement read on state television 
in neighboring Albania, the rebels claimed villages were being attacked 
west of Pristina, but added that their troops continued to respect 
the unilateral cease-fire. The Serbian and Yugoslav governments showed 
little sign that they were prepared to bow to international pressure. 
Citing the Kosovo crisis and NATO threats of intervention, the Serbian 
government Friday put into effect a harsh decree tightening state 
control over companies and independent media. The decree broadens 
government authority and envisions punishment for companies, institutions 
and individuals who act contrary to the government's view of patriotic 
behavior. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>