<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981009.2100.0047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And good Friday evening to you. It appears the impeachment process 
in the house and perhaps the Senate will drag on for months. It appears 
there will be weeks if not months of live, teleadvised hearings, a 
parade of witnesses, perhaps including Monica Lewinsky, Linda Tripp, 
Vernon Jordan, Ken Starr, and the president of the United States. 
It will as they say get worse before it gets better. It appears that 
after an almost prayerful response yesterday, saying it's up to God, 
the president today might have just decided it's up to him. The White 
House strategy -- they've switched to defense. That is because offense 
as a strategy effectively died yesterday when the house voted to begin 
impeachment proceedings. With an update, John Palmer starts us off 
this Friday evening from the north lawn of the White House. Good evening, 
Brian. This was a most unusual day after today. It was very busy at 
the White House. The president had meeting after meeting. He met with 
the presidents of Ecuador and Peru to try to help them settle a border 
dispute and also met with the German chancellor-elect Gerhard Schroeder. 
The main subject of conversation was Kosovo and are other NAto companies 
going to have to carry out a military attack against Serb positions 
in the province of Kosovo? And of course the big event here at the 
White House, that show of democratic unity when the whole group of 
democrats from the house and the Senate flanked the president after 
their meeting. They walked out to the microphones showing unity for 
the big budget battle going on the next couple of days. Perhaps as 
if the White House wanteded to show even though there were approximate 
1 defections in that vote yesterday, there is -- 31 defections in 
that vote yesterday, there is unity on the budget. Incidentally at 
a rose garden ceremony today for police officers, there was a woman 
that the president just shook her hand there. That is congresswoman 
McCarthy from new york. she voted against the president yesterday. 
So there are no ill feelings. There is a feeling here that let bygones 
are bygones, get on to more important things. As we mentioned, the 
president went from near prayerful yesterday to the apparent strategy 
of we're going to fight them on the beaches, in the hearings, tonight 
sources inside the White House being quoted as saying we're going 
to go after these witnesses and be just as aggressive a partner in 
these hearings as the other side. Yeah, they're going to put on a 
very, very vigorous defense. In the meet rgs next week, the White 
House lawyers want to determine, to define the scope of these hearings. 
Is it just going to be the Monica Lewinsky matter or other things? 
Travel gate? Filegate? Are these all going to be piled in? What is 
the scope and breadth of this and they also want to call an awful 
lot of witnesses, many of whom were called before the independent 
counsel, the grand jury, because they feel that Starr's questioning 
was very biased and one-sided and they want to try to cross-examine 
the witnesses to bring out good things and clarify their testimony. 
John, it appears the election becomes all-important. Absolutely. People 
were saying today even these ground rules discussions next week could 
change. For instance, if the democrats do very well and at least hold 
the majority of their seats they have now, perhaps this hearing could 
be not as gruesome, could be quicker and narrowed down much more. 
But if the republicans score very well in the election, things could 
go very badly for the president in the house in the hearings after 
the election. So very much the election is a referendum on the whole 
swigs. Veteran NBC news correspondent John Palmer working late tonight, 
thank you very much. Thank you, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>