<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981009.2100.1800 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This presidency has been in crisis since about January and reached 
its lowest point so far yesterday by just about any standard, with 
the House of Representatives voting to hold impeachment hearings. 
It a short time ago a number of top White House staff members started 
departing for the private sector. It can now be fairly called an exodus 
but can it also be viewed as a normal part of second term life? Our 
report from Linda Vester. October 1 -- Mike McCurry, White House press 
secretary and trusted spokesman for the president, gives his last 
press briefing and returns to private life. October 5 -- Erskine Bowles, 
the White House chief of staff, and Rahm Emanuel, top policy advisor, 
both announce they will be leaving. And that's the world economy lurches 
toward recession, Robert Rubin has made it clear he'd like to leave 
when the time is right. For months Washington has been abuzz with 
reports of a demoralized White House staff, trying to remain focused 
but dealing with a president who admits misleading them. Are they 
fleeing a sinking ship of state? Stephen Hess, a presidential historian 
at the Brookings institution, says it's a factor of a second-term 
President VI. In the 7th and especially the 8th year you start to 
get a real exodus. So this is not at all unusual. President Reagan, 
the last two-term president, also had resignations at the end of his 
second are second term. Sometimes thep simply burn out. Sometimes 
they get offered gloriousobs in the private sector that they wouldn't 
have had if they hadn't served on the president's staff and in some 
cases it's just a case of watching their kids grow up and they're 
not hope home. That's why lanny Davis left the White House. In my 
case I had announced I was going to leave in December of 1997 because 
my wife was pregnant with weigh now have is a 6 month old son. Davis 
decided to leave before the Monica Lewinsky scandal became public. 
Mike McCurry extended his stay at the White House because he didn't 
wish to leave in the middle of this. The timing may still be particularly 
tough for the president. After all, with his presidency at stake, 
Clinton will want to turn to trusted advisors. So he's likely to turn 
inside to fill the top positions. By and large, most of the situations 
have been where there's an understudy waiting in the rings. When it 
comes to crisis management, for example, Podesta, currently deputy 
chief of staff, is a strong contender to step in as chief of staff. 
But Rahm Emanuel has been by Clinton's side since the beginning of 
his first presidential campaign. He may be harder to replace. It's 
very hard to fill the level of talent very easily. Still there's always 
the lure of the White House, considered by many a good career move 
under any circumstances. Remember, Al haig and Henry Kissinger both 
made their republic tages during the darkest days of the Nixon presidency. 
For the rest, the impeachment hearings could be a career bonanza, 
launching investigators and even journalists to national prominence 
as the process plays it self out. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>