<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981009.2100.3192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A lot of parents think their child is smarter than any other, but 
the parents of -year-old Greg Smith have a case here. Greg is already 
a senior in high school, scheduled to graduate before he is 10 years 
old. Now as it aired on "the today show," reporter Jessica jallings 
of Jacksonville, Florida, has the story. I'm reading books such as 
nicolo machiavelli's "prince," Dante's "Divine comedy," I am also 
reading bocaccio's "the decameron." From books to math to molecules. 
I'm also interested in colonial and 19th century architects and also 
some of the late 20th center architecture such as gaudi. An adult 
mind in the body of a 9-year-old boy. Any subject I will love and 
equally treasure. I look at him and to me he's just my little sunlshine, 
ab Angel. By 14 months, Greg Smith knew his ABC's. What comes after 
H? i. What comes after O. P. Good. This is jurassic period. By 2, 
he was reading. What are the other periods? The cretaceous. It didn't 
take long for Greg's mother, Janet, a former actress, and his father, 
Bob, a microbiologists, to realize Greg was different. He picked up 
on things so early and quickly we didn't have to compare him to other 
children. It was obvious. Still, we were afraid that we brnt being 
objective and held back as much as we could in making judgments. Have 
you ever seen mommy out in the snow before? no. It wasn't until the 
smiths moved from Pennsylvania to Florida that they recognized the 
challenges ahead. Not only was Janet recovering from breast cancer, 
they would have to find Greg the right school. This elementary school 
has a gifted program He knew the scientific tpwhames. If I'm talking 
about bacteria, he would say no, that's a something phobia kind of 
thing. We put him in second grade, hoping to keep him with his peer 
group. It soon became obvious no elementary school could challenge 
Greg for long. By the ends of the year he was taking ninth grade classes. 
By 8, he was enrolled in high school full time. What is it that she's 
regained? She's regained her identity and she's regained her self-esteem 
and pride. Within a year, mostly in one-on-one classes, Greg finished 
nineth, 10th and 11th grades. When we first started seeing him on 
the campus, he was only 7 and walking around taking math and we were 
all like what is that child doing here? A member of the national honor 
society, Greg has earned a 4.8 grade avenue rage and is a top candidate 
for varl I addict torian. -- Valley addictorian. And he is popular. 
Orange park high voted him schoolhistorian. Everybody accepts him 
and looks up to him. The only names I hear are dougy howser, Albert 
Greg Stein and genius. He's so cute. Do you like the attention a little 
bit? Yeah. It it makes me feel great. What grade are you in? 12th. 
The but the scrutiny is constant. So I have Mercury, 200.59. And with 
an avenueage four hours of homework a night, there is concern he is 
quickly leaving childhood behind. I set a timer and say you may only 
study until this goes off and then you have to go play. Having to 
spend four hours a night at his age, missing out on other play activities 
a normal 9-year-old would rather do but he's not a normal -year-old. 
What about girls? Do you like them yet? Well, I don't love them and 
I don't dislike them. Some would say here's a -year-old child who's 
going to be missing out on a lot of life. He has ideas of what he 
wants to do with his life and he wants to get started with it now. 
These are reference, due back in the morning. Ideas like getting to 
college by the age of 10. His top two choices, Duke and Swarthmore. 
They're my goals, and they're the goals that I have set. I have decided 
I'm going to work my abilities to do it so if I don't meet those goals, 
I would probably be the only one upset. I want to be an engine reer, 
a medical research doctor, hopefully our ambassador to the United 
Nations and president of the United States some day. Why do you think 
you have this special gift? Well, that's something that I don't know 
and I probably won't know. But all I can say is that I'm very thankful 
for it and I will try to use this gift to the best of my abilities 
to do whatever I can for the good of mankind. Jessica jallings in 
Jacksonville, Florida. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>