<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981009.2100.2208 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
These days, getting a job in the White House often means getting a 
lawyer right away too. Ken Starr's investigation of the president 
cast a very wide net of subpoenas. Some of the president's closest 
staff members are now faced with mounting legal bills in this scandal 
of mostly infidelity. Tonight from "dateline NBC," Josh mankiewicz 
reports that staying faithful to the president has come hat a huge 
cost. I did not have relations with that woman. Miss Lewinsky. It 
all start window that lie. And in a town where lies are mixed with 
the truth to form a tasty cocktail called spin, the result was this. 
A secretary of state talking not about Bosnia or Iraq but about her 
boss' sex life. I believe that the allegations are completely untrue. 
I'll second that, definitely. The rest of the cabinet had to toe the 
official line as well. Of course they didn't know it wasn't true when 
they said it but in Washington the rules of spin dictate that one 
untruth often follows another. And this spin was you can depend on 
the word of the president. His staff went forth to spread the message. 
He has made it very clear he had no sexual relations with the woman. 
I believe what he said was truthful. So did his closest allies. I 
am personally not aware of any improper relationship. I know the president 
emphatically denies it. Do you believe the president? i do. And finally 
his wife. From my perspective this is part of the continuing political 
campaign against my husband. Many, many sound bites later, after a 
seven-month spin cycle, they learned they were defending a lie. I 
misled people including even my wife. His wife might forgive him. 
His country might also. But when Bill Clinton lied he also lied to 
some of his closest friends and supporters and many of them still 
feel wounded. After he made that statement he sent a lot of people 
out to repeat it in one form or another and all were party to this 
lie. I wanted to see him take more responsibility for that and for 
misleading the American people and it sort of broke my heart that 
he didn't. Adds Bill Clinton's press secretary for three years, Dee 
Dee Myers had first hand experience with the White House spin machine. 
In many cases those people who went out and supported the president's 
version of the story had known him a long time. Do those people have 
a right to feel retrade? I think they have a right to be angry. I 
don't nope how he thought he was going to get out of this. I don't 
understand that. A lot of people were sent into both personal and 
financial hard times by Mr. Clinton's unwillingness to admit his affair 
and as a result a lot of people got calleds before Ken Starr's grand 
jury, meaning they'd have to hire lawyers. And inside the Beltway, 
top legal help doesn't come cheap -- $300 to $500 an hour. That's 
one reason why Betty Currie, the president's secretary, has a legal 
Bill estimated at more than $100,000. And she's not alone. According 
to a study by "the nation" magazine, the president's friends and aides 
have racked up for than $23 million in legal bills in the four years 
since the Whitewater investigation began. Once this is all over, federal 
officials who have had to retain private attorneys can apply for reimbursement 
from the justice department at taxpayer expense but the reimbursement 
limit is $125 an hour -- a fraction of the actual cost. The fees are 
a Burden I carry every day. Lisa caputo used to be Hillary Clinton's 
press secretary. And while she was never accused of any wrongdoing, 
she was summoned to testify in front of a grand jury investigating 
whewater. It's a very serious matter. And it is a matter where you 
ought to be guided by legal counsel because it's an investigation. 
You know, I'm not a lawyer, I don't have legal training, I don't know 
the first thing about going about how to comply with a subpoena or 
even what it means. And there is also the emotional cost of becoming 
entangled in a very serious and very public investigation. I'll never 
forget the day I received my first subpoena. And I remember that night 
a news program did a special report on the issuing of subpoenas to 
the White House. Lisa caputo, press secretary to the first lady -- 
And all of a sudden my name and my picture popped up on the screen 
with my then colleagues. And that's how my family found out. While 
the president's friends and aides measure their personal pain, fellow 
democrats are weighing the political damage. Democratic candidates 
who once clamored to appear with the president now Ponder whether 
to appear with him at all. Nancy Pelosi, a six-term congresswoman 
from San Francisco, says Mr. Clinton now has to prove himself all 
over again. ok. What's the price? That there's a road back and the 
president has to rebuild his credibility. You think he's been a good 
president? I think President Clinton has been a good president. He 
has done great things for the country. I think he can do more. Do 
you trust him? Do I trust him? yes. Yes, I hesitated because I was 
going to put it in the perspective of I trust him -- I trust him, 
yes. I don't have to trust him personally. I guess a couple weeks 
ago you wouldn't have hesitated? I trust that the president can come 
back with the American people and that he has two good years ahead 
of him. Yet while some in Washington now wonder whether they were 
too quick to follow the White House spin, there are plenty who say 
they have no regrets. I am not at all sorry with sticking up for him, 
nor am I sorry right now. Attorney lanny Davis was already in the 
spin business. A White House lawyer in charge of answering reporters' 
questions about various Clinton scandals when word first surfaced 
about sex in the oval office. I've been out there sometimes all by 
myself endorsing what the president has said, and it's a painful experience 
but I don't think I'm in as much pain as he is. It's not clear who's 
in more pain these days, the president or the people whose support 
he most needs. We were campaigning in 1991 and 1992. The people were 
feeling uncertain about the future and he made them believe. You know, 
for one beautiful moment he made them beeve, and I think that's been 
squandered. Well, that begs the question, which is the real Bill Clinton? 
It's all the real Bill Clinton. I mean the believer, the repairer 
of the breach, the idealist, the opt I amist. And the liar? The dissembler, 
the certain who doesn't ever quite want to take responsibility for 
the effects of his behavior sometimes on other people. Up put a lot 
of people through a thought. I just think it's so regrettable and 
so unnecessary. That report from "dateline NBC," NBC news correspondent 
Josh mankiewicz. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>