<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981009.2100.1115 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For some perspective on what we've been seeing and hearing in the 
media on the subject of impeachment among others we are joined by 
author and presidential historian Doris kearns Goodwin, with us this 
evening from Boston. Doris, I guess we should start with sorting out 
the coverage. We are hearing a lot about the history of this part 
of the constitution. What should we believe as consumers and what 
should we throw out? The hardest part is in there are so few precedents 
to go by. It's not like the Supreme Court where you have a whole body 
of law. We have got Andrew Johnson, Richard Nixon and a handful of 
judges. And unfortunately Congress seems to be picking quotes from 
the past to support their own point of view. Can you help us with 
some wisdom? When yesterday was roundly referred to as a very historic 
day in the House of Representatives, how real does it all seem to 
you? And are we in for months of protracted hearings and more pain 
and more of the kind of sordid public details? Oh, God, I hope not. 
I mean my only hope is that during both the Andrew Johnson impeachment 
proceedings in the Senate and during the Richard Nixon one, the congressmen 
and senators did seem to grow in the process and realize how important 
it was, what they were doing. By the end of the Johnson impeachment, 
seven radical republicans, the party who wanted to convict, decided 
it wasn't right what they were doing. They said they were looking 
into their open grave, would never win election again but they voted 
the right way. And on Nixon too you see a sense of that maturing as 
they went along. So my hope is that instead of this dragging on for 
a year, if they can just think it through and figure out what the 
standard it, injury to the state, to the constitution, and figure 
out if what he did violates that sufficient for impeachment. And if 
they can't convince themselves of that, they better figure out another 
Rout. Gerald,Ford once said something on the subject of impeachment, 
a quote that has been taken out and run around the block a few times 
by the news media and almost taken on a meaning other than intended. 
That's what gets so confusing. At one point Ford did say that impeachment 
is whatever the House of Representatives and Senate says it was at 
that time but there is another quote where Ford says it has to rise 
to the level of high crimes and misdemeanors. That's the problem. 
The White House0 quotes the whole thing that Johnson was not yamped 
even though he lied about a private affair. And the republicans on 
their side quote a judge who was yamped for lying under a grand jury. 
But judges are under a different standard of conduct than presidents. 
That's not the answer, a grabbag from history. If the public doesn't 
feel legitimate about this, they better figure out another course. 
Some are convinced Mr. Starr has a whole lot more, that maybe one 
or two articles of impeachment will actually survive this process 
and be drawn up. At that point are there contemporary wise people 
to approach the White House and have say talk with the president? 
I don't note what who they are. During the Nixon time, we didn't know 
for sure who would be the profiles in courage. But if it does appear 
the White House is on that speeding train, Congress will say it's 
not even in the republicans' interests to impeach and convict him. 
But there have got to be some wise guys around. Maybe they're sleeping 
right now and will come out svehibernation. And we thank author and 
presidential historian Doris kearns Goodwin for joining us. You're 
welcome. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>