<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981009.2100.0596 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joining us this evening with their thoughts on what's ahead in this 
Congress, republican congressman James Sensenbrenner, who is the second 
ranking member on house Judiciary committee, and virgil Goode of Virginia, 
one of 31 democrats who crossed party lines to vote in favor of an 
impeachment inquiry. Did you hear anything from the White House before 
or after casting your vote, and did you expect to? No, I was not called 
by either the president or Mrs. Clinton of the I was in some meetings 
where members of the White House staff were there and made comments 
about the upcoming vote that occurred yesterday. And what do you think 
constituent reaction is going to be this weekend? I've already heard 
from a number of constituents. I bet you have. Some are smad and some 
are glad. -- Mad and some are glad. I'd say it's slightly running 
against the president in the fifth district of Virginia, although 
he has substantial support. One person called and said they would 
not vote for me because I voted for the impeachment inquiry. That's 
all part of the tertoirment Mr. Sensenbrenner, as we watched this 
White House, the president yesterday saying it's in the hands of God 
today, aides today sporadically leaking the fact that they're going 
to be an active participant in what you conduct up there. What if 
the thought of a fight, another parade of partisan back and forth, 
just doesn't appeal to the American people? is Well, it certainly 
doesn't and I think they're going to blame anybody who drags this 
out. I would hope we could get to a set of stipulated facts, which 
would eliminate the need for a parade of witnesses and extensive cross-examination. 
This whole inquiry boils down to who is telling the truth and who 
isn't and we'ring -- not going to put this sad part shall our history 
behind us until the Judiciary committee comes up with an answer accepted 
by, maybe not agreed to but accepted by the majority of the American 
people. That's what happened in the Nixon impeachment. Mr. Sensenbrenner, 
you're going about the process of figuring out to have witnesses or 
not, if so, how many, and if so, who? Where is the point where you 
decide all right, most of what Ken Starr sent up here is accurate. 
Let's just take Vernon Jordan's word, Bruce Lindsey's word, and so 
on? How do you prevent redundancy, in other words? That's up to the 
lawyers and the staff. Chairman Hyde is committed to moving this along 
as expeditiously as possible and if it doesn't, it will be because 
the White House wants to drag it out for their own purposes. I think 
the Burden is on the White House and the committee democrats to make 
sure we have the speedy wrapup. I would hope this would be a search 
for the truth rather than a race against the clock. Mr. Goode, we 
hear speedy wrapup and yet you know the fight between your party and 
there's was about time limits on the debate and when will this be 
over. Well, I take chairman Hyde at his word and I believe that both 
parties and both sides of the aisle on the Judiciary committee, most 
of them, want to get it over as quickly as possible. I certainly want 
to see it over as quickly as possible and I hope everyone will work 
towards that end. On the resolution, though, the democratic resolution 
wanted a narrow focus on Starr's report and I preferred the more open-ended 
resolution of the republicans so that we could get Whitewater and 
anything else brought out, decided, and get it over with and not drag 
it out. When your constituents say to you this weekend, congressman, 
this is about sex, he mitde might have lied, there might have been 
obstruction but basically this is about sex, it's not why we sent 
you to deesdees, what do you tell them -- D.C.? What do you tell them? 
I disagree. The statements he made under oath, I think he needs to 
answer why he responded "absolutely true" to a statement even his 
lawyer now says is false and misleading. What is the chance that for 
the republicans this will become about as success flt as the last 
government shutdown was, that republicans will not heed Bob Dole's 
advice, they will in fact overplay where harned? Well, what the constitution 
requires the House of Representatives to do is to determine whether 
or not the president committed an impeachable offense. At this point 
in the inquiry we don't know the answer to that question. If President 
Clinton has committed an impeachable offense I believe we are constitutionally 
obligated to draft articles of impeachment and present them to the 
Hoe of representatives for a vote. On the other hand, if he hasn't 
committed an impeachable offense, we've got an equal constitutional 
obligation to take a vote on that fact and to issue a report giving 
our reasons why we decided he didn't commit an impeachable offense. 
The process has got to be made to work and I point out that this isn't 
a quick process, it isn't a simple one. It took 19 months from the 
time the first resolution was passed on Richard Nixon until the articles 
of impeachment were voted out and then he resigned before the house 
could even vote on them. And I think the American people would prefer 
a authorize okay complete and credible job instead of having to do 
another one and another one. On that note, we thank the gentleman 
from Wisconsin and the gentleman from Virginia. Appreciate your time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>