<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last quarter, mutual fund investors learned just how wrong they can 
be when they do the right thing. The right thing in the last few months 
has been for investors to exit stocks altogether, or at least to cut 
their holdings in equities and take refuge in bonds. But investors 
who did so got it wrong if they fled to funds that buy corporate debt, 
emerging-markets issues, mortgage-backed securities or convertibles. 
That is because the market witnessed an event in the last quarter 
that is rare indeed: Treasuries left other bonds in the dust. Typically, 
all bonds trade in tandem vis-a-vis Treasury securities with similar 
maturities. But in the decoupling of bond prices, which began in August 
and has continued, prices of corporate bonds, junk issues, mortgage-backed 
securities and emerging-markets bonds have fallen while Treasury securities 
have risen. Adding insult to this injury, even if investors did things 
doubly right _ abandoning stocks and getting into a fund that buys 
Treasury securities _ they found that they would have been better 
off owning individual Treasuries outright. For these two reasons, 
bond funds demonstrated their severe limitations during the most recent 
quarter. Pile on top of these disappointments management fees _ in 
general about 1 percent _ and you have a sad story for investors in 
bond funds. Of course, most bond fund returns were not anywhere near 
as dismal as those of stock funds, many of which registered double-digit 
declines during the quarter. While taxable bond funds as a group eked 
out a gain of 0.3 percent in the quarter ended Sept. 30, municipal 
bond funds returned 2.83 percent. When specific areas of the bond 
market are examined, it becomes clear that the average bond fund came 
in well below its corresponding index. For example, the tiny gain 
for taxable funds was far below the 4.23 percent return of the Lehman 
Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is used by Morningstar Inc., 
the Chicago financial publisher, as the benchmark for the universe 
of taxable bond funds it tracks. Long-term corporate bond funds rose 
an average 1.52 percent compared with the 4.95 percent return of their 
benchmark index. Similar stories are seen in fixed-income areas that 
showed big losses for the quarter _ emerging-markets and high- yield 
bonds. The J.P. Morgan emerging-markets bond index lost 21.23 percent, 
while the average fund in the area fell 32.37 percent. And the First 
Boston high-yield bond index declined 6.15 percent; the average junk-bond 
fund lost 7.71 percent. Both benchmarks are used by Morningstar. Municipal 
bond funds that invest in long-term issues nationwide returned 2.92 
percent, modestly less than the 3.08 percent return of the Lehman 
Brothers index but considerably less than the Bond Buyer long-term 
index, which rose 4.37 percent in the quarter. And the First Boston 
convertible bond index was down 10.85 percent, versus a loss of 11.2 
percent loss for the average convertible bond fund. (But a comparable 
Merrill Lynch convertible bond index was also down 11.2 percent) . 
It is not unusual for indexes to beat the returns of individual managers. 
It happens in more and more stock funds every year. The trouble is, 
mimicking the returns of various fixed-income indexes is far more 
difficult for investors than mirroring the performance of the main 
stock indexes. There are several reasons for this. One is a bond's 
maturity. Unlike stocks, which are essentially open-ended investments, 
bonds mature, or repay principal at a predetermined date. Bond funds, 
to diversify and have enough cash to cover shareholder redemptions, 
typically invest in bonds of varying maturities and durations _ the 
amount of time it takes to receive the present value of all the interest 
and principal payments from a bond. However, bonds of a certain maturity 
are likely to perform quite differently than those of another. In 
the third quarter, for instance, the biggest decline in yields _ 23 
percent _ and biggest corresponding rise in price came in the five-year 
Treasury note. But the average duration of Treasury bonds held by 
Morningstar's universe of government bond funds is eight years, not 
the five-year paper that provided the biggest bump. What that meant 
is that funds with lots of bonds maturing in eight years did not move 
up as much as those limited to five-year maturities. Of course, nobody 
could have predicted that five-year securities would attract so many 
investors. And, going forward, longer-term Treasuries could outperform. 
But given that bond funds are constrained in their holdings, it does 
make picking spots in the market rather tough. Differences in credit 
quality _ a big risk associated with fixed-income investing _ are 
another reason it is difficult to mimic bond fund indexes. Although 
bonds of many different qualities declined during the quarter, those 
with lower grades fell much further than their higher-quality brethren. 
Too many iffy issues in junk-bond funds dragged down their performance 
much further than the indexes. The best returns in the quarter were 
in funds that invest in long-term Treasuries. These include the closest 
thing to owning long-term bonds outright, the various American Century 
Benham Target funds, which own bonds with specific maturities. Five 
of these funds, which returned between 8.41 percent and 10.4 percent, 
landed in the top 20 taxable bond funds during the quarter. On the 
other side of the ledger, some emerging-markets bond funds did so 
poorly that they lagged behind even the worst-performing stock funds. 
The two biggest money-losers in the taxable bond arena were the Morgan 
Stanley Institutional Emerging Debt A fund, which lost almost 40 percent 
of its value, and Phoenix B Emerging Markets Bond fund, down 36.11 
percent. Losses in some junk-bond and convertible-bond funds were 
not as severe _ but still nasty. The John Hancock High Yield Bond 
B fund fell 18.06 percent during the third quarter. Morgan Stanley 
Dean Witter B Convertible fund lost 15.29 percent. Proving that fund 
managers can make a difference, some of the other winning taxable 
bond funds were those that buy international fixed-income securities, 
like FFTW International Fixed Income, up 10.42 percent. How could 
some international bond funds do so well when the vast majority declined? 
The manager of FFTW International, Liaquat Ahamed, chief investment 
officer of Fischer Francis Trees &AMP; Watts in New York, made three 
good calls. He had longer-term bonds in the portfolio, stuck with 
countries rated AA or better and concentrated holdings in Germany. 
The fund's small size also helped: it has just $77 million in assets. 
Even though bond returns are outpacing those of stocks, bond funds 
have other pitfalls to be aware of. While owning a portfolio of bonds 
in a fund can reduce the risk that one particular bond issuer will 
fail, you're never quite sure of what you own. And because funds hold 
bonds of different maturities, it's tougher to buy a fund for a specific 
purpose, like paying for a child's college education in 12 years. 
Such a goal can be achieved easily through holdings of individual 
bonds, typically zero-coupon securities, which make no payments until 
maturity. But an even bigger problem lies in fund costs. With returns 
in the low single digits, expenses of 1 percent are a big bite out 
of shareholders' pockets. And because the management of these funds 
is typically less active than that of a stock fund, one wonders about 
the bang shareholders are getting for their bond buck. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>