<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0510 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a decision that could change the way asylum seekers are treated 
in immigration detention centers, a federal judge in New Jersey has 
ruled that immigration officials can be sued for violating the human 
rights of detainees at a center in Elizabeth, N.J. The ruling by Senior 
Judge Dickinson R. Debevoise of U.S. District Court in Newark, N.J., 
is the first major decision in a lawsuit filed last year on behalf 
of 19 asylum seekers who were held at the detention center in 1995, 
when a violent uprising led to the temporary closing of the center 
and a review of the way the Immigration and Naturalization Service 
handled detainees. The Elizabeth center was reopened 20 months ago 
and, until now, has been held up as a model. But last week, about 
94 of the 268 detainees at the center began a hunger strike to demand 
more food and fewer telephone charges, and to be released to their 
friends and relatives while a judge determines their immigration status. 
The strike ended Wednesday after INS officials promised to look into 
their grievances. On Monday, another hunger strike began at a detention 
center in Jamaica, N.Y., when 96 detainees refused to eat breakfast. 
By Friday, 18 people were still refusing food, and 10 doctors and 
nurses were monitoring the health of detainees around the clock, said 
Alen Atkinson, a spokesman with the immigration service's district 
office in New York. The judge's decision, issued Oct. 1 but disclosed 
by the detainees' lawyers Wednesday night, is unlikely to help the 
strikers because the ruling is narrow: it applies only to the 19 detainees 
who filed the suit alleging that they had suffered physical and psychological 
abuse at the hands of untrained and poorly supervised staff members. 
Six of them were granted political asylum and now live in the United 
States; two are still in detention in Pennsylvania, and the others 
were deported to their countries, where they remain in hiding, said 
Penny Venetis, the lawyer who filed the suit last year on behalf of 
the detainees. Despite its narrowness, Ms. Venetis said, the ruling 
marks the first time that international human rights law has been 
applied to government employees in the United States. The judge also 
ruled that the Esmor Correction Corp., the company that was running 
the detention center under contract with the INS, could be sued on 
the same grounds. Daniel V. Gsovski, the lawyer for the corporation 
and some of its officers, said he could not comment beyond stressing 
that the judge had not yet ruled on culpability. ``This is just an 
evaluation on his part of what body of law, in addition to U.S. law, 
can be used in the case,'' Gsovski said. ``The facts of the case have 
not changed, and we expect to prevail in the end.'' Officials of the 
immigration service also played down the significance of the judge's 
decision and instead claimed victory because, while the judge had 
ruled that international law could be applied to government employees, 
he had also ruled that the same law could not be used against the 
agency itself. But Ms. Venetis and other immigration lawyers, who 
for years have complained about the detention of asylum seekers and 
the conditions in which they are sometimes held, said the decision 
offered hope to hundreds of refugees who each year seek asylum in 
the United States only to find themselves behind bars while judges 
determine their fate. There are now about 800 asylum seekers in detention 
throughout the country, Bergeron said. ``Even when they are here, 
they are not protected by U.S. law, because they are not legally here; 
it's like they haven't reached our shores, even though they are in 
New Jersey,'' said Ms. Venetis, director of the Rutgers Constitutional 
Litigation Clinic. ``This decision says that now they can find remedy 
through international law.'' The decision, binding only in New Jersey, 
could have a wider impact if federal judges in other states use it 
as precedent when considering their own cases, Ms. Venetis said. The 
judge's ruling comes at a time when two internationally recognized 
human rights organizations, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, 
have released highly critical reports of the way the United States 
government deals with asylum seekers, and just weeks after the immigration 
subcommittee of the Senate Judiciary Committee held a hearing to examine 
the INS's detention practices. Since April 1, 1997, when a new law 
took effect, the immigration service has detained all asylum seekers 
upon arrival. Those found to have a ``credible fear'' of persecution 
in their homeland can be freed, or paroled, but only for ``urgent 
humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit.'' Because Congress 
never defined those terms, the INS has allowed its 33 district directors 
to exercise their discretion. Eleanor Acer, a senior coordinator of 
the asylum program at the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights who testified 
at the congressional hearing, criticized the New York district's record 
of parole. Of the 70 asylum seekers her agency has monitored, only 
one was released following the agency's own parole criteria. ``The 
New York district has failed to release many of our clients, despite 
the fact that they're eligible for parole,'' she said. ``Many of these 
clients are survivors of torture, and were ultimately granted asylum 
by immigration judges.'' The Amnesty International report, released 
Tuesday, states that detention of asylum seekers is in itself a human 
rights violation. ``Asylum seekers are not criminals,'' the report 
says, calling on the United States to detain refugees only when there 
is no other recourse and their behavior makes it necessary. Paul L. 
Hoffman, chairman of the board of Amnesty International USA and a 
civil rights lawyer in Los Angeles, said the judge's ruling on the 
New Jersey detention center ``puts some real teeth into what we have 
been arguing.'' Hoffman, who used the same international principles 
in 1992 to sue Ferdinand E. Marcos, former president of the Philippines, 
said the ruling would also make it easier to hold federal government 
officials to the same standards used for abusive government officials 
outside the United States. ``It shows that cruel, inhuman and degrading 
treatment is a violation of international law, no matter where it 
takes place,'' Hoffman said. ``As more international attention is 
paid to this issue, it will be impossible for the government not to 
start paying attention.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>