<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the embers still smoldering from the financial-market firebombings 
of the third quarter, prospective investors in closed-end funds might 
want to borrow a few lessons from junkyard dogs and other naturally 
skilled scavengers: Venture forth, sniff around and, perhaps, bite. 
The adventurous will inevitably be drawn to what appears to be the 
wasteland of emerging-market closed-end funds, which endured some 
of the worst of the destruction. Many have fallen by more than half 
from what were already low levels; some are trading for a few dollars 
or less a share. For anyone who bought these funds years ago, when 
prices were high and Wall Street gushed about the coming boom in Asia, 
Russia and Latin America, buying may seem less tempting now that the 
economies there have fallen so steeply. But if you missed the peak, 
opportunity may be staring at you. ``This is where I think the most 
money will be made over the next 12 months _ the most money in the 
closed-end fund universe, anyway,'' said Thomas J. Herzfeld, chairman 
and president of an investment advisory firm in Miami that is considered 
an authority on closed-end funds. ``They've just been pummeled. Fifty, 
60 and 70 percent losses are not unusual.'' These funds, which issue 
a fixed number of shares that are traded like those of ordinary companies, 
have often fallen much further than the underlying values of their 
holdings have. This divergence is especially wide in Latin America, 
where stock prices as measured by the Morgan Stanley Capital International 
index for the region have fallen 45 percent this year _ most of that 
in the third quarter. But the gap helps create a new opportunity, 
Herzfeld and others say. Eventually, the shares and net asset values 
should converge. Buying shares of a fund that is trading at a 25 percent 
discount to its net asset value, for example, is like buying a $100 
stock for $75. Many of these funds, however, are trading at even greater 
discounts. Closed-end funds can trade at discounts for various reasons 
_ shaky economic fundamentals, bad management, poor performance. But 
the severe declines in stocks have contributed to some of the widest 
discounts in years, especially among Latin American equity funds. 
Herzfeld cited the Latin American Discovery fund, whose discount grew 
from 2 percent in March to 21.7 percent at the end of September. The 
Latin American Equity fund behaved similarly; its discount widened 
from 15 percent in February to 29.9 percent at the end of September. 
One reason for the selloff is that many investors panicked after Russia 
defaulted on its debts in August. Sensing a spreading malaise, they 
dumped shares no matter where their funds were invested. ``No one 
really knows where the bottom is, but there's no question that discounts 
have gotten pretty deep,'' said Gregg Wolper, international funds 
editor at Morningstar Inc., the financial publisher in Chicago. ``That's 
why more of the bargains are in Latin America.'' Others say funds 
invested in central Europe were also unfairly pummeled. Douglas Beck, 
an emerging-markets strategist at Merrill Lynch, is looking at funds 
with stakes in Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, which he saw 
as likely to recover even if Russia kept foundering: ``I think it's 
time for investors to dip their toes back into certain markets. What 
we're telling clients is, regardless of what discounts do, we're making 
the assumption that discounts are close to an extreme. If you're looking 
to gain exposure now, the ability to purchase a diverse pool at a 
20 to 25 percent discount is a tremendous opportunity.'' He said he 
was looking at two funds that do not have exposure to Russia: Central 
European Equity, which is 30 percent invested in Germany, and Central 
European Value, heavily invested in the Czech Republic. Both are trading 
at discounts of substantially more than 20 percent. Of course, many 
people doubt that the worst is over. Some closed-end fund strategists 
say they remain extremely wary about Latin America partly because 
it is unclear whether countries like Brazil, Venezuela and Mexico 
will need to devalue their currencies or require International Monetary 
Fund bailouts. ``There's good reason to feel the contagion has seeped 
into Latin America,'' said Michael T. Porter, a closed-end fund analyst 
at Salomon Smith Barney. ``If you feel it's a question of when, not 
if, the currencies come under great pressure, then a 30 percent discount 
in closed-end funds today may not look so big.'' Porter said he was 
looking at emerging-market bond funds; although the shares of these 
funds are not trading at steep discounts _ some are even trading at 
premiums _ their yields are relatively high. ``In a slow-growth global 
environment, I might want to take bond funds relative to equities,'' 
he said. As examples of possible buying opportunities, he offered 
the Morgan Stanley Emerging Markets Debt fund, which was yielding 
nearly 15 percent at the end of September, and Templeton Emerging 
Markets Income, yielding 13.6 percent. The Morgan Stanley fund has 
a discount of 23.2 percent, and the Templeton fund has a premium of 
1.4 percent. Porter argued that even if countries represented in these 
funds devalued their currencies, the damage would be minimal because 
much of the debt held by the funds is denominated in dollars. But 
stocks in equity funds are denominated in local currencies and can 
tumble in value if there is a devaluation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>