<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0513 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A senior on the dean's list leapt to her death from a 20th-floor window. 
A troubled engineering student, taking a semester off, hanged himself 
in his home on Long Island. A student at a popular fraternity stabbed 
himself twice in the chest and barely survived. In just the last three 
weeks, two students at Columbia University have taken their own lives, 
and a third tried to. And while college officials do not believe there 
is any connection, the rapid-fire spate of tragedies has shaken the 
campus, dominated discussions and the college newspaper and led administrators 
to arrange intensive counseling sessions for grieving students. Although 
experts say suicide is the second leading cause of death among college 
students nationwide, after accidents, Columbia officials say only 
one student committed suicide in this decade before this year. ``It's 
been a huge shock to a lot of people,'' said Sam McConnell, a junior 
from Salt Lake City who had studied last semester in Paris with Shirley 
Yoon, the student who jumped to her death. ``Every week you look in 
the paper and you see another one. It's really scary.'' Administration 
officials have launched a ``massive and extensive reaction'' to try 
to comfort grieving students and quell fears that the suicides may 
have been linked, said Virgil Renzulli, a spokesman for the university. 
On Sept. 23, after Ms. Yoon's suicide, officials organized an emergency 
meeting in which the resident assistants of her dormitory were instructed 
how to help other students cope with the shock and grief they were 
experiencing. Counselors also organized two meetings at the East Campus 
dormitory where the suicide took place. The campus Counseling Center 
opened for extended hours for anyone who wanted to talk about the 
incident. Because Ms. Yoon's parents wanted her buried as soon as 
possible in accordance with Korean custom, administrators quickly 
circulated a telephone message inviting students to Ms. Yoon's memorial 
service, where members of a Christian a capella group Ms. Yoon had 
belonged to sang two of her favorite hymns. The next morning, the 
engineering student, Darren Pascual, was found dead in his parents' 
home on Long Island. Pascual, 19, had sent an e-mail to two close 
friends the night before, detailing his frustrations. One friend, 
Hamilton Hayashi, a sophomore, said that Pascual's message mentioned 
suicidal thoughts, but in a way that made Hayashi believe the danger 
had passed. Some students, including Hayashi, complained that administrators 
did not show the same sensitivity after Pascual's death as they did 
for Ms. Yoon. No phone message was circulated, and Hayashi said no 
special counseling was offered. Alex Perez, a sophomore, contended 
in a letter to The Columbia Daily Spectator, the student newspaper, 
that ``the administration handled the suicide death of Darren Pascual 
very poorly.'' College officials denied any insensitivity, saying 
only that Pascual's death was handled differently because it occurred 
off campus. In the weeks that followed, even students who did not 
know Ms. Yoon or Pascual found themselves frequently discussing the 
suicides. Then, early Sunday morning, paramedics were called to the 
Beta Theta Pi house at 550 W. 114th St. Another student, Eric Peel, 
22, had stabbed himself twice in the chest, according to police and 
The Columbia Spectator. Peel entered the hospital in critical condition, 
but his condition stabilized overnight. A university spokesman said 
Peel has since been released from the hospital and is taking a leave 
of absence from the university. After a traumatic three weeks, students 
are eager for the regular rhythms of school to return. James Landrito, 
a junior who saw Ms. Yoon's body lying outside his window, said, ``I 
don't know if there's something weird going on, or if it's just these 
isolated incidents, but I just hope it doesn't happen anymore.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>