<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0468 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite requests for information from Congress, the CIA repeatedly 
ignored or failed to investigate allegations of drug trafficking by 
the anti-Sandinista rebels of Nicaragua in the 1980s, according to 
a newly declassified internal report. In a blunt and often critical 
report, the CIA's inspector general determined that the agency ``did 
not inform Congress of all allegations or information it received 
indicating that contra-related organizations or individuals were involved 
in drug trafficking.'' Beginning in 1986, the subject of contra drug 
trafficking became a focus for critics of the Reagan administration's 
policy toward Nicaragua who charged that the CIA was shielding drug 
smugglers to protect its anti-Communist covert action program in Nicaragua. 
That year Congress imposed a fund cutoff for any contra group that 
had members involved in drug trafficking. Despite that ban, the CIA 
failed to tell Congress about allegations it had received against 
at least eight individuals with contra ties. During the time the ban 
on funds was in effect, the CIA informed Congress only about drug 
charges against two other contra-related people. In addition, the 
agency failed to tell other executive branch agencies, including the 
Justice Department, about drug allegations against 11 contra-related 
individuals or entities. The report quotes many active and retired 
CIA officers who served in Central America as saying they either did 
not hear or did not believe allegations of drug trafficking involving 
the contra rebels, with whom they worked closely. It also makes clear 
that the agency did little or nothing to investigate most of the drug 
allegations that it heard about the contras and their supporters. 
In April 1987, the acting director of central intelligence, William 
Gates, wrote in a memorandum that it was ``absolutely imperative that 
this agency and our operations in Central America avoid any kind of 
involvement with individuals or companies that are even suspected 
of involvement in narcotics trafficking.'' The CIA investigation that 
began almost a decade later, however, found no evidence that the memorandum 
was distributed to anyone other than Gates' deputy for operations, 
Clair George. The new study is the second volume of the CIA's internal 
investigation prompted by a 1996 series of articles in The San Jose 
Mercury-News, which claimed that a ``dark alliance'' between the CIA, 
the contras and drug traffickers had helped finance the contra war 
with millions of dollars in profits from drug smuggling. The series 
also alleged that this network was the first to introduce crack cocaine 
into South Central Los Angeles. The first volume of the CIA inspector 
general's report, issued in January, dealt primarily with the specific 
allegations raised by the Mercury-News series and dismissed the newspaper's 
central findings. But the second volume is the result of a broader 
inquiry into long- unresolved questions about the contra program and 
drug trafficking. In all, the inspector general's report found that 
the CIA had received allegations of drug involvement by 58 contras 
or others linked to the contra program. These included 14 pilots and 
two others tied to the contra program's CIA-backed air transportation 
operations. The report indicates that information linking the contras 
to drugs began to emerge almost as soon as the contras came into existence 
_ and before it became publicly known that the CIA was supporting 
their effort to overthrow the Marxist-led government in Managua. In 
September 1981, as a small group of rebels was being formed from former 
soldiers in the National Guard of the deposed Nicaraguan dictator, 
Anastasio Somoza Debayle, a CIA informant reported that the leadership 
of the fledgling group had decided to smuggle drugs to the United 
States to support its operations. Eight months later, another report 
indicated that one prominent leader of the group, Justiniano Perez, 
was a close friend of a known trafficker. The agency's response also 
set something of a pattern. ``No information has been found to indicate 
any action to follow up or corroborate the allegations,'' the report 
said. `` No information has been found to indicate that the agency 
pursued any action to follow up or corroborate the May 1982 FBI information 
concerning Justiniano Perez's alleged close friendship with a reputed 
drug trafficker named Paisa and Perez's alleged promise to help Paisa 
later in return for financial assistance.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>