<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0239 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The more or less continuous weekend roar usually begins on Thursday 
afternoon in my neighborhood, when the man across the street starts 
his handsome red Toro lawn mower with a brisk tug and begins laying 
great diagonal stripes across the lawn, maneuvering with accustomed 
ease around the sweeping branches of his gigantic spruce tree. By 
Friday evening, the whole city is rumbling, as powerful machines of 
every description are set to trimming some of the most mollycoddled 
grass plants on the planet. In the Midwest, where I live, we are good 
neighbors and good citizens, and rather clean cut, and our lawns are 
potent symbols of our values. Americans have been using one bizarre 
mechanical contraption after another to mow their lawns for more than 
100 years now. In the 1860s, lawns were kept down by scythes or by 
sheep, according to Virginia Scott Jenkins, a cultural historian, 
in ``The Lawn: A History of an American Obsession'' (Smithsonian Institution 
Press, 1994). By the late 19th century, the first lawn mowers had 
been patented; in 1880, one manufacturer described its mower, the 
$13 Charter Oak, as ``truly wonderful,'' saying, ``no one who wishes 
for a fine smooth lawn can afford to dispense with it.'' This fall, 
advertisements for John Deere's new $3,000 riding mower, the Sabre, 
describe the experience of using this machine in these stirring words: 
``It's not just mowing a lawn, it's doing a victory lap.'' My neighbor's 
richly striped lawn across the street compares favorably with some 
of the finest mowing patterns at stadiums around the country. Here 
in Kansas City, Mo., the Royals replaced their artificial turf with 
the real thing a couple of years ago, and this seems to have inspired 
a lot of new local mowing fashions: ball-field stripes, plaids and 
fancy chevrons are now fairly common. If the team ever makes it to 
the World Series again, the stadium groundskeeper will be a very influential 
man about town. Our 15-year-old neighbor, Max, loves everything about 
internal combustion, and his father bought him a sturdy green Craftsman 
mower for his 13th birthday, so he could start saving for college, 
or maybe a car. Max has been about 8 feet tall since he was in grade 
school, and when he started mowing with that big machine he looked 
like a foal trying to keep his legs under him. This summer he advanced 
to cutting a nice pattern of cross-hatches, and picked up a little 
more business in the neighborhood on the strength of it. My friend 
Bob, a landscape architect, amuses himself by mowing along the contours 
of his one-acre plot, making wide, slow, graceful green ripples around 
his house. His is a firmly established John Deere neighborhood, he 
explained one Saturday morning while brushing the clippings off his 
shiny mower. He pointed out the retired gentleman down the street, 
who mows nearly every day, riding his little Deere tractor around 
and around under the trees, obsessive in his cultivation of neatness, 
keeping the prairie at bay. Bob and his neighbor are iconoclasts: 
Straight lines dominate and define their well-clipped landscapes. 
The lawn-care experts recommend varying the mowing pattern to encourage 
lushly uniform grass, but people here like to hew to the line. The 
Midwest sets square with the world, like a big checkerboard. Our streets 
and property lines run in cardinal directions, and people tend to 
do everything, including mowing, at right angles to the grid, regardless 
of the natural lie of the land. Front-yard fences are generally frowned 
on in my neighborhood, but the property lines between yards can be 
discerned by a subtle difference in mowing heights. My own front yard 
is very shady, but it still has a lawn of sorts (I tolerate wild strawberries 
and clover, to contribute to the illusion of turf). I mow it every 
couple of weeks, rolling out my sleek, quiet little reel mower and 
attacking each clump of grass from whatever angle seems best. Wearing 
garden hat and gloves and wrap-around plastic safety glasses, I'm 
the picture of a responsible citizen gone slightly off her rocker. 
An older neighbor has wondered aloud why my husband does not assume 
this manly chore, but I'm proud to do it myself. My sister in Wisconsin 
notes that women are also the principal mowers in her little corner 
of the Midwest. My husband and I are actually slowly eliminating our 
lawn and replacing it with a nice woodland garden, but turf grass 
is a tough and cheerful ground cover where it will grow, so I patch 
the bare spots in the front yard every fall with ``shady mix'' grass 
seed. The grass seedlings are up now, but as usual I have just remembered 
to order a load of firewood. It is our supplier's practice to dump 
at least part of the load on the lawn, burying the breathtakingly 
delicate green down of new shoots under a ton of excellent oak and 
pecan. Sometimes it's a week before we can get the wood stacked up 
on the porch, and by then the leaves have begun to fall. I'll rake 
a lot of those leaves off the lawn and onto the compost heap, but 
around the first of November I bring out my secret weapon, an old 
gas lawn mower capable of chopping leaves into a fine mulch. The weather 
is very fine here in the fall, and the work is invigorating. When 
I'm finished, I like to sit for a few minutes on my rusty little glider 
on the front porch and enjoy a cool Bob's '47, a local microbrewery's 
popular fall lager. I'm not really the microbrew type, but a Bob's 
always does wonders for the lawn. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>