<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0023 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three hours before Game 1 of the National League Championship Series 
on Wednesday, a group of San Diego Padres players huddled around outfielder 
Steve Finley as he switched on his laptop computer. This was no last-minute 
skull session for the coming game against the Braves. Finley was using 
the Internet to track a storm that was getting ready to belt Atlanta. 
The players could gauge the intensity of the rain, and thus its duration, 
by the color of the cloud patterns on the computer screen. From the 
darkening colors headed for Atlanta, the Padres had an idea they would 
be in for a long delay. They were right. A game that was supposed 
to begin at 8:15 p.m. began at 10:16 and would not end until 1:43 
a.m. on Thursday. Approximately 18 hours later, San Diego was at it 
again. Most of the Padres groaned when they realized they were in 
for a rain-soaked interlude. Since arriving Tuesday morning, they 
had heard about nothing but Atlanta's pitching: Smoltz, Glavine, Maddux. 
Enough, already. The Padres wanted to play. But while his teammates 
groaned, Ken Caminiti said ``Yes'' under his breath. The Padres' 35-year-old 
third baseman and walking infirmary, a mass of knots, welts and bruises, 
desperately needed the delay to patch himself together. ``That was 
really big for me,'' Caminiti said after the game. ``I needed some 
extra time in the training room today. I woke up really in a bad state; 
I had a massage therapist named Jody that worked on me for three hours, 
so I had a lot of knots. That delay gave me time. I went back in there, 
I said, `O.K., we got time.''' All the rest and extra rubdowns paid 
dividends in the 10th inning. With the score tied, 2-2, Caminiti got 
hold of a Kerry Ligtenberg fastball and sent it soaring over the center-field 
wall for what turned out to be the game-winning run in a 3-2 Padres' 
victory. Caminiti's heroics gave San Diego a surprising 1-0 lead in 
the four-of-seven-game series. Kevin Brown's dominating performance 
on Thursday night _ 0 runs, 3 hits, 11 strikeouts, 3 walks _ stretched 
the lead to 2-0. But more than those clutch performances, San Diego's 
two victories here have set a bruising tone for the rest of the series. 
The Padres also put the Braves on notice: they better come out of 
their business-as-usual mode and play with passion. In a span of less 
than 48 hours the Padres have set the terms and conditions of what 
was supposed to have been a walk through the park for Atlanta: They 
reduced the game to its simplest elements. You throw it; we hit it. 
You hit it, we'll catch it. With an inspired victory in Game 1, sore 
bodies healed, silent bats awakened; confidence was sent soaring. 
The Padres survived a monsoon and a marathon; after a two-hour rain 
delay, and after Atlanta rallied to tie the game in the bottom of 
the ninth, the Padres came away with a victory in a game the Braves' 
John Smoltz started. After the game, at 2:15 on Thursday morning, 
a group of Padres sat in front of the big-screen television in the 
comfortable visitor's clubhouse at Turner Field, the same place they 
had huddled around Finley nine hours before. They were watching ESPN 
to see how it all happened. First they watched the Yankees meet their 
Waterloo against the Indians in New York; watched, politely silent, 
while Chuck Knoblauch effectively fiddled as Rome burned. Then came 
the good stuff. In the fifth inning, Tony Gwynn knocked in a run to 
tie the score, 1-1. In the eighth, Ruben Rivera, the former Yankee 
who was playing in place of the injured Greg Vaughn, doubled, knocking 
Smoltz out of the game. Rivera went to third on a heads-up play when 
Caminiti lined out, and later scored on Andres Galarraga's throwing 
error. They watched Atlanta's Ryan Klesko barrel into third in the 
ninth, crashing headfirst into Caminiti's knee and shoulder. They 
heard the announcer quote Caminiti: ``I wasn't trying to cheat, I 
was just trying to block the base.'' Caminiti's home run drew a ripple 
of reaction, but not much else: that deed was done, after all. Now 
it was a new day, figuratively, at least, and Tom Glavine was on the 
horizon. Two lockers down from Caminiti's, Vaughn, the Padres left 
fielder who hit 50 home runs this season, moved gingerly with a heavy 
bandage around his left leg. Vaughn pulled his quadriceps in the fourth 
inning going after a fly ball. He took his turn at bat, but Manager 
Bruce Bochy told him to sit out the rest of the game and replaced 
him with Rivera in the fifth inning. Vaughn said he instinctively 
resisted, thinking heroically but selfishly. ``I said, `Why?''' Vaughn 
recalled. ``He said, `What if they hit a ball out there and you can't 
get to it?' He was right; I needed to come out because no one would 
feel worse than myself if I couldn't get to a ball because of an injury.'' 
It was a night, and early morning, of storms and great plays. A night 
when two heavy favorites lost extra-inning games. The Braves and Yankees 
might consider borrowing Steve Finley's laptop and tracking the weather. 
Feels like a crazy storm is brewing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>