<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Muni bonds almost always make sense for investors in high tax brackets, 
because federal income taxes, which go as high as 39.6 percent, can 
take a big chunk from the coupon income of Treasury securities; income 
from munis is generally not subject to federal taxes. Today, however, 
the tax advantage of municipals makes sense for people in any tax 
bracket, largely because the yield of municipal securities with maturities 
of five years or more is nearly the same as the before-tax yield on 
comparable United States Treasury securities for the first time in 
more than a decade. Usually, muni yields are only 80 percent to 85 
percent of Treasury yields. The highest-quality 30-year muni, for 
example, was recently yielding about 4.64 percent, or 98 percent of 
the yield of a 30-year Treasury bond, said Richard J. Moynihan, director 
of municipal securities at the Dreyfus Corp. After taxes, an investor 
in the 36 percent tax bracket, for example, would wind up with a yield 
of 3.03 percent on the 30-year Treasury, only 65 percent as much as 
the investor in munis, Moynihan said. (Put another way, the tax-equivalent 
yield of that muni for this investor is 7.25 percent.) And an investor 
in the 28 percent bracket would wind up with an after-tax yield of 
only 3.4 percent on the 30-year Treasury bond, just 73 percent as 
much as the muni. ``The value is screamingly there in municipals,'' 
Moynihan said. Kenneth Willmann, who oversees fixed-income securities 
at USAA Investment Management in San Antonio, agreed. ``If you pay 
any federal tax at all, you are better off in municipals,'' Willmann 
said. ``That's maybe a rash statement, but that's pretty close to 
true.'' For investors with less than $100,000 available for a muni 
portfolio, mutual funds are generally the best way to go. That's because 
muni bonds are generally sold in lots of $25,000, meaning it would 
take $100,000 to get a reasonably well-diversified portfolio of four 
issues. Of course, fund investors give up an important protection 
enjoyed by people who hold bonds outright: If a bond is held to maturity, 
the principal is repaid. A fund makes no such promise. Municipal yields 
are relatively high because low interest rates this year prompted 
record issuance of new munis as well as refinancings of older issues. 
The extra supply put downward pressure on prices throughout the muni 
market, pushing up yields, which move in the opposite direction. Prices 
of Treasuries, meanwhile, rose to 30-year highs, as Americans and 
foreign investors _ many of whom receive no tax benefit from munis 
_ rushed into Treasuries, pushing down yields. What happens next? 
If global equities markets stabilize and the United States stock market 
pulls out of its slump, Treasury prices could fall. The ``devil's 
advocate'' view, said Eric Jacobson, a fixed-income analyst at Morningstar 
Inc., the financial publisher in Chicago, is that prices of munis 
would follow suit. The more common opinion, Jacobson said, is that 
the municipal market is cheap and that there is plenty of room for 
prices to rise. If the economy slows or even slips into recession, 
municipal securities will provide more income than Treasuries after 
taxes, and they will resist credit depreciation more than bonds issued 
by corporations, he said. Making the case for general obligation bonds, 
which are backed by the full faith and credit of a municipality, he 
said, ``Most city governments have done a good job of putting their 
fiscal house in order over the last few years, so it'll be a pretty 
slow process of deterioration if they are hurt by recession.'' Still, 
investors worrying about a recession might want to steer clear of 
some of the best-performing funds, which can be loaded with ``nonrated'' 
municipal bonds, or securities issued by weaker municipalities. A 
lot of managers think that the current yields on many weaker credits 
are not high enough to compensate investors for the risk, Jacobson 
said. So while good managers can pick their way through weaker credits, 
many are choosing instead to buy high-quality muni bonds. Investors 
looking for managers who can take advantage of carefully researched 
bargains among higher-yielding, nonrated securities should stay away 
from high-yield municipal bond funds that are often required to have 
a big percentage in lower-quality issues, said Michael J. Chasnoff, 
a financial planner in Cincinnati. ``If you want a fund that can be 
more opportunistic, you need a national fund,'' Chasnoff said. What 
else should investors watch for in a muni fund? Low operating expenses, 
Chasnoff said, because even superior returns may not compensate for 
extra costs. He recommends funds with expense ratios below the average 
of their peer group _ 1.10 percent for long-term national municipal 
funds, for instance, according to Morningstar. And what about single-state 
muni funds? These often make sense for investors who live in a state 
with high taxes, like California or New York, because the income will 
be exempt from state as well as federal taxes. The downside of a single-state 
fund is that it offers less diversification by making an investor 
dependent on the local economy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>