<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0328 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I didn't always throw air kisses at other men, or carry around photos 
of myself in different outfits in my backpack, or cleanse my face 
with blue herbal astringent. But then, I didn't always aspire to be 
a male model. I graduated from Stanford University and earned a master's 
degree in English at Oxford University. Through the years of my higher 
education, I assumed that hunting for a job would entail submitting 
a resume and donning a suit and tie for interviews. Yet today a typical 
job application requires me to stand in my underwear in front of portly, 
blase Italian designers and to present them with pictures of myself 
dressed as a boxer, a businessman and a sulky layabout stretched shirtless 
across a sofa. A few months ago, I would have laughed uproariously 
at this scene. But when the first telephone call came, beckoning me 
into the world of Kate, Naomi and Tyson, I responded with little hesitation. 
I still don't know how a stylist named Jennifer got my name. All I 
know is that she left a message on my answering machine last May with 
the time and address for a casting call for a rum advertisement for 
a magazine. I phoned back to say she had the wrong number. But she 
insisted there was no mistake, and mentioned a reference, although 
the name meant nothing to me. ``Look, why don't you just come in tomorrow 
for the casting?'' she said. ``It'll only take 20 minutes and if you 
get the job, it pays $1,000.'' Three days later, I was sitting with 
three other rent-a-hipsters on a sofa in the basement of the Knitting 
Factory in lower Manhattan, wearing rouge and pretending to be digging 
the smooth rhythms of a bongo that none of us could play. My shaved 
head annoyed the English director. It gave off a glare that distorted 
his light readings. ``Put a hat on that one,'' he said, pointing to 
my skull. Despite my pleas that a hat didn't go with the rest of my 
outfit _ baggy black combat pants and sport sandals over socks _ they 
made me wear a red crocheted skullcap that looked like an oversize 
yarmulke. Who was I to complain? They paid me $1,700 for a six-hour 
day, and for that I'd even wear a beret. I took the plunge into the 
world of modeling. Within a month I had signed on with my own New 
York agency and a booker who really does say ``Ciao, babe'' at the 
end of our phone calls. I began ``to work on my book,'' as they say. 
A book, which is a model's most valued possession, is a photo album 
filled with plastic sleeves and branded with the agency's logo. A 
``new face'' like me needed to fill those sleeves with photos that 
showcased my range of looks. I would spend days in a TriBeCa loft, 
dressed in a boxing cup and hand wraps, while a photographer told 
me I looked ``fierce'' and spritzed water on me. Another day, in a 
dingy room in Chinatown, an English photographer convinced me to take 
off my clothes and pose in a headdress made of peacock feathers. But 
the best exposure of all for new faces comes from walking the catwalks 
in Milan. I made plans to go in late June, to land a few jobs during 
the showing of the menswear collections for spring 1999. The first 
order of business would be finding a local modeling agency. Unfortunately, 
as my New York booker explained: ``Everyone in the world who wants 
to model is there. It's the worst time of the year to try and get 
an agency.'' A more established model would have sent his book to 
several agencies in advance and secured representation before arriving. 
But in my case there wasn't time, and my book _ with only six pictures 
in it _ wasn't strong enough; I would have to take my chances on the 
spot. ``We'll give it a try,'' my agent said. ``I'll make appointments 
for you and we'll see what happens. OK buddy? Ciao, babe.'' In Milan, 
the first agency I visit is Future Models on Via Voghera, where I 
am supposed to ask for Val. I walk into a courtyard and can immediately 
tell where the agency's offices are _ the staircase leading up to 
it is lousy with models. In New York, I never see more than a couple 
of other models at a time at my agency, but here there are 30 or more 
lined up just on the staircase. It is incredible how similar they 
all look, dressed in a uniform of combat pants, running shoes, tank 
top and sunglasses on top of the head. From a distance, the flock 
of strong-lined faces is daunting. Some are dark and chiseled, others 
long-haired and androgynous, but they all seem rare and beautiful 
creatures. But as I wait for Val, I overhear snatches of conversation, 
and the illusion is shattered. The voices ring out in the accents 
of Texas, California and New York. Conversations are straight out 
of a frat house. ``He did the same thing in Miami _ take ecstasy every 
single night and just drink through it,'' someone says. ``He was downing, 
like, a bottle of Jack and a bottle of vodka every night and then 
he wakes up the next day like: `Let's go get something to eat. Let's 
go the beach.' He's fine.'' ``Yeah, but wait till his liver gives 
out,'' someone else says. ``Bottle of Jack every day, that'll do it.'' 
They talk about who has already arrived and who's coming. About which 
agency they're with in Paris or New York. And about the castings they've 
been to that day. ``Angelo was clowning with people's books,'' someone 
says, referring to Angelo Versace. ``Pointing to pictures and laughing.'' 
There is also talk of the previous night _ who got lucky, who came 
home drunk and tripped over the fruit bowl and passed out. After a 
while, Val, who pronounces his name ``Wal,'' comes looking for me. 
``Oh, you are Christopher, OK,'' he says. ``I didn't see you there. 
OK, come into the office with me.'' I take a seat by the window and 
try to act nonchalant while Val flips through my book. He lingers 
over some of the pages and seems pleased. Then he hands it to a short 
woman and they examine it together. Unaware that I speak Italian, 
she mutters, ``But all bald like this?'' and shakes her head. Val 
begins what sounds like a rejection speech. ``It's a bit late,'' he 
says. ``There have been already many of the castings last week. And 
there are other castings that you would have already had to send your 
composite to.'' My heart sinks. ``But we don't have another one like 
you ... without hair. This is why.'' Why what? I'm not catching his 
drift. He asks me what other agencies I plan to see, and I give him 
the list _ Joy, Why Not, Model Plan, Beatrice, Major. He tells me 
to call after I've seen the others. As I get up to leave, I say I'll 
call tomorrow, hardening my face to mask the shame of rejection for 
the walk past the other guys in the stairway. But Val says: ``No, 
call me the end of the day today. For us it's OK, but you must decide 
yourself.'' I feel a rush of joy. Yes; he says yes. I won't go unrepresented 
after all. I manage to squeak out the answer that my booker gave me 
for this unlikely situation. ``I'm going to have a look at a few places 
before I make my decision,'' I say. I visit two other agencies, and 
the response is even more enthusiastic. ``It is definitely possible,'' 
one agency says. ``You have all the possibilities. All of them.'' 
Another says, ``The door here is always open for you.'' In the end 
I choose Why Not. It has the nicest offices, it also represents women 
(which makes visiting your booker more fun) and I like its name. Marco, 
my new Italian booker, gives me a list of casting calls and a map 
of the city and sends me to make my way. The next day, I visit Gianfranco 
Ferre's headquarters on Via della Spiga, where I am confronted by 
a line of shirtless men in the outer office, holding their books protectively 
across their chests like high-school girls heading for class. I've 
been to other bathing-suit and underwear castings, but they usually 
let you wait until you're inside the casting room, behind closed doors, 
before asking you to remove your shirt. Here the six-packs and the 
ripped pecs are out early. I take out my camera and make a few souvenir 
snapshots, which brings jeers from the crowd. ``Oooh, sexy.'' ``Can 
I take your picture?'' We stand in an orderly line, the modeling meat 
market at its most unsubtle. The young receptionist does her best 
to ignore us and pretend that this is business as usual. But even 
the experienced models recognize the crassness of the situation. ``This 
is crazy,'' one says. ``Slabs of meat,'' someone else says. ``Gianfranco's 
going to have himself a steak dinner,'' a third says. I reach the 
front of the line and am ushered into a room with three others. There 
is a large table, behind which four or five of Ferre's assistants 
are sitting. And standing in front of it is the designer himself. 
As in the days of medieval Europe, his portly figure is a clear marker 
of status. The skinny men are here to please, the fat man to be placated. 
Four half-naked men are lined up in front of him for his approval. 
Ferre goes through their books with an air of indifference. Occasionally, 
he glances from a page to the man, but his expression never changes 
from a little sneer. In the group ahead of me the lucky few are sent 
behind a curtain for measuring, and the less fortunate head out the 
door to the next casting call. As our group lines up in front of the 
designer, I try to make light of the situation ``Che spettacolo!'' 
I say. What a show! Ferre ignores me. When my turn comes to approach 
and hand over my book, I skip my usual line about how I just started 
and there aren't many pictures. He tries to flip through the book 
quickly, but two pages stick together. He makes an attempt to part 
them, which fails, and he swiftly moves on, thereby skipping one-third 
of my life's work. He flips disdainfully through the empty page and 
hands the book back without looking at me. I have failed to please 
the king. It's back to my life as a peasant. Soon I realize that my 
true job as a model is to wait in line. Or more accurately, my job 
is to run frantically around Milan searching for obscure addresses, 
then sweat for two hours in a dark and suffocating hallway. At least 
there are the fascinating discussions of Italian history and architecture 
while waiting. ``Have you been to the Palazzo Ducale?'' I ask an American 
from Northern California. ``Yo, it's hella cool there,'' he replies. 
``It would have been sweet to live there, like back in the day, you 
know?'' ``Yeah.'' We are waiting in line for the Gaultier casting. 
Unlike most designers, Jean Paul Gaultier is not afraid to use new 
faces, and the unpredictability of his taste attracts droves of upstarts. 
My California friend reveals that he took a modeling course from the 
Barbizon people (``Be a Model or Just Look Like One'') and was one 
of the lucky few actually signed by an agency. His candor violates 
what I've observed to be one of the main rules of male modeling: Don't 
admit you take it seriously. Ask a model how he got into it, and he'll 
invariably say he was pursuing his dream of being a writer/actor/artist 
when a casting agent or photographer stopped him on the street. The 
model would really prefer to get back to writing/acting/making art, 
but the money is too good to pass up. For my part, the money has never 
been very good, so I can't use this excuse. For me, the motives are 
more complicated, but also simpler: Once an awkward teen-ager, I still 
crave the affirmation of my adult attractiveness. Plus, I really want 
someone to take pictures of me and Tyra Banks naked on a Caribbean 
beach. We reach the front of the Gaultier line only to find that the 
rumors that the designer is interested only in blonds are true. Suddenly 
the guys who dyed their hair on a tip don't seem so pathetic. Gaultier 
takes a quick look at me, thanks me for my time and offers me a piece 
of fruit. But the next day, the hair-rumor mill generates better news. 
Issey Miyake is said to be looking for guys with shaved heads. After 
an hour and a half in line, I approach the casting table and I can 
feel it _ they are interested. Usually the design team half looks 
at me, half sifts through the composite cards that other guys have 
left. But here, four sets of eyes, including those of Naoki Takizawa, 
the head menswear designer, are riveted on me. I'm no longer bumbling 
self-consciously up to the table, but striding smoothly and confidently. 
I remember an article I've read about Japanese business practices. 
I identify the most important person at the table (Takizawa), use 
both hands when I pass him my book and complete the transaction with 
a neat bow. He bows back in acknowledgment of my flawless etiquette 
and then examines the book, lingering promisingly over several of 
the pages and whispering to his stylist. ``Please step around to the 
back,'' the designer says, motioning toward a curtain behind the casting 
table. There is clothing, and young Japanese fitters are dressing 
a few chosen models in various ensembles. They give me beige drawstring 
pants and a long-sleeve canvas T-shirt with a dragon embroidered in 
bronze thread on the front. It fits perfectly. ``Kawaii,'' I say, 
using one of the three Japanese words I know. ``Cute.'' Everyone laughs. 
``Yes, kawaii,'' they say. As I walk in the clothes, they take Polaroids 
of me, one a full-body shot and then a close-up; they measure my arms 
and legs and take my shoe size. For me, that's the clincher _ an experienced 
model had explained that if they get as far as measuring you for shoes, 
you're in. I leave the casting call pitying the poor fools still waiting 
in line for a job that's already mine. But the next day, when Issey 
Miyake sends the list of confirmed models to my agency, my name is 
nowhere to be found. I'll never learn why. In the end, I never do 
get to walk in any shows. But I do get invited to a postshow party 
for Gucci at Bar Ricci, Milan's trendiest gay nightspot, which is 
a favorite of the visiting fashion flock. The monumental Stazione 
Centrale, Mussolini's architectural triumph, is just up the road, 
and it casts a disapproving but ineffectual shadow over the revelry. 
The trendy camouflage pants and military haircuts of the partygoers 
seem at first glance right out of the days of Il Duce. But one look 
at the crowd tells you that the ``fashionisti'' have triumphed over 
the fascisti. The DJ spins a new Italian dance hit whose chorus goes, 
``I'm horny, I'm horny, so horny, horny, horny.'' Boy George is there. 
Models, designers and celebrities mingle and flirt. After a series 
of 15-second conversations with many of my acquaintances from the 
last two weeks, I spot Kevin, a model I posed with for a day on the 
Lower East Side for an Italian magazine. We quickly fall to discussing 
the only areas of interest between us _ how the shows have gone. Understandably, 
this is not my favorite topic. ``I did pretty well,'' Kevin says coolly. 
``I got, like, five or six things. Plus Gucci booked me, but they 
didn't use me. Still had to pay me though.'' ``How much?'' ``Guch 
is, like, 4 G's. And Versus was like 15 hunj. Most of the others were 
4 or 5. But you know, the agency takes, like, 50 percent.'' ``Yeah,'' 
I say, attempting to commiserate. ``It's tough.'' I had no shows to 
boast about. The conversation moves on to girls. ``I mean, you don't 
even have to try here,'' Kevin says. ``You just stand around and profile 
and they come to you, you know what I'm saying?'' Right on cue a beautiful 
young woman passes behind him. ``Like that, right now,'' he says. 
``Just walk by you and touch you and pretend like they brushed up 
against you. They know why we're here. They know we're clockin' bank. 
That's why it's so easy.'' Alas, I did not measure up to Kevin and 
the rest of the competition. I spent $2,000 on air travel, hotels 
and meals in Milan, and I didn't earn back a penny. No callbacks, 
no bookings, no women pretending to brush up against me. I have to 
question if I have any future in modeling. But somehow I know that 
when the next round of shows begins in Paris, I'll be on a plane. 
Unless of course, my father finds those pictures of me in the peacock 
feathers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>