<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0490 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This wealthy village has long fancied its main thoroughfare, Franklin 
Avenue, as the Fifth Avenue of Long Island. Long Island's first department 
store, Loeser's, opened here in the 1930s. Seeking the lucrative local 
carriage trade, other high-end retailers from Manhattan soon followed, 
like Best &AMP; Co. and Peck &AMP; Peck. They sold luxury clothes, 
jewelry, furs and crystal. Bridal shops abounded. In fact, Garden 
City owes its very existence to the man who invented the department 
store. Franklin Avenue later became home to branches of New York City's 
toniest stores: Bloomingdale's, Saks Fifth Avenue, Lord &AMP; Taylor. 
As the rest of the island grew over the years, however, Franklin Avenue 
peaked and gradually lost its luster. Three years ago, Abraham &AMP; 
Straus, at the old Loeser's site, shuttered its doors. Its building 
has stood vacant ever since. Soon after, Bloomingdale's abandoned 
Franklin Avenue to embrace the marble floors and synchronized fountains 
of the Roosevelt Field shopping mall two miles away. Now Saks is taking 
its Fifth Avenue name to the great indoors. Saks is preparing to leave 
Franklin Avenue for a new home at the mall in the spring of 2000. 
On Friday, officials at the company's headquarters in Birmingham, 
Ala., confirmed the plans, contingent on a zoning approval from the 
town of Hempstead for the new site. ``Maybe this is the kick in the 
pants the village needs'' to forge ahead with the revitalizing of 
Franklin Avenue, said Bertram Donley, who has been working on that 
goal as executive vice president of the local Chamber of Commerce. 
Past efforts have not been a smashing success. The old Bloomingdale's 
building was taken over by Sears, which hardly has the same panache. 
``Who from Garden City is going to shop at Sears _ the gardeners?'' 
said an office worker who did not give her name. Sears draws sparse 
crowds and presents a less-than-elite image with a hot-dog vendor 
cart at the entrance. Similarly, in the former home of Martin's clothing 
store, another Franklin Avenue storefront's name emblazoned on the 
windows screams scaled-down: Pay/Half. Franklin Avenue's problems 
stem from modern suburban retailing trends that can be summed up in 
two words: Roosevelt Field. That shopping mall, one of the biggest 
in the nation, is just two miles away. Since Roosevelt Field opened 
in 1956, the mall has grown from its original cluster of outdoor stores 
to an enclosed three-level complex with spacious atriums, food courts 
and valet parking. The mall has drained shoppers from the downtowns 
of nearby villages. The ever-expanding mall now draws 10 million visitors 
a year to its 250 stores, anchored by Macy's, J.C. Penney, Stern's, 
Bloomingdale's and Nordstrom, with 2.4 million square feet of floor 
space and parking for 11,000 cars. Sales per square foot there rank 
third in the country. Roosevelt Field's success has many other strip 
malls and stores positioning themselves cheek-by-jowl to the mall. 
There is historical irony in Garden City's troubles in keeping top-line 
stores. The founding father of this village in Nassau County, one 
of the nation's first planned communities, was the legendary retailer 
Alexander Stewart. He created the village in 1869 by buying 7,000 
acres of open land. Under his concept, the street grid was laid out 
and strict residential and commercial zoning controls were imposed 
to keep the village attractive and open. Stately colonial-style homes 
now line his namesake street, Stewart Avenue. Stewart became the richest 
man in New York City by inventing the department store concept. His 
Marble Place, replete with a domed atrium and mahogany cabinets, opened 
at 280 Broadway near City Hall in 1846. Henry James and Anthony Trollope 
sang its praises. Stewart's foresighted successors in Garden City 
devised ample off-street parking in the 1920s, which helped the village 
survive for decades, Donley said. Other communities, failing to anticipate 
the importance of the automobile, were unprepared for the onslaught 
of malls ringed by large parking lots. Franklin Avenue thrived. Russell 
Matthews, a developer on a retail project here, said that Franklin 
Avenue was always ``known for the finest stores.'' Garden City's merchants 
and village officials would like to see those glory days return. In 
fact, far from being beaten, they have plans to turn Franklin Avenue 
into the Rodeo Drive of the East. As a contrast to the malls and department 
stores, the merchants and officials want to create a main street ambiance 
with smaller high-end specialty shops. Because most of Franklin's 
buildings are entered from the parking lots in the rear, planners 
say, the sidewalks in front appear empty and uninviting from the street. 
So the plan calls for slowing down traffic by adding curb-side parking 
and sprucing up the front. The merchants also plan to create a business 
improvement district. The first concrete sign of progress is the recent 
purchase of the A. &AMP; S. store and adjoining sites and their renovation, 
now under way, by Renaissance Development, a partnership of Albanese 
Development and Castagna Realty. ``We're redirecting our retail to 
the customers who find big malls sterile, impersonal and overwhelming,'' 
said Matthews, executive vice president of Albanese. The site will 
have a movie theater, restaurants, Platypus (which sells home furnishings 
and accessories) and the Imaginarium (which sells educational toys). 
Merchants and village officials are also counting on Franklin Avenue's 
still strong commercial presence. The street is lined with many major 
brokerage houses, banks, large office buildings and corporate headquarters, 
including the Dale Carnegie Institute and the Automobile Club of New 
York. ``My sense is that unlike the last decade of moving to malls 
and discount shopping, there is a return to main street,'' said the 
mayor of Garden City, Frank Tauches Jr. ``There is a commitment by 
the developers, shop owners and the village for a renaissance of Franklin 
Avenue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>