<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0518 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Plenty of sound and fury emanated from the stock market this week. 
What does it signify? In one of the more tumultuous weeks on record, 
the Dow Jones industrial average ended at 7,899.52, up just 1.3 percent. 
Not much of a move on the week. But investors stomached enormous swings. 
On Thursday, the Dow fell 274 points before clawing its way back. 
It jumped 167.61 points on Friday, or 2.17 percent. Does the end-of-the-week 
about-face represent a real turning point? Or is it just another sucker's 
rally? There are, of course, highly intelligent market observers who 
will argue that the gloom has just begun, while others say the worst 
is over. The truth, of course, is unknowable. But after a volatile 
week, tallying the good news and the bad may be in order. What is 
hurting the stock market? The big fear, though not news, is that corporate 
profits will disappoint or even plunge later this year and in 1999. 
Since earnings drive stock prices, this is a grave concern. The Standard 
&AMP; Poor's 500-stock index is trading at approximately 23 times 
earnings, well down from its peak of 28, but still high historically. 
Meanwhile, other key props have recently been kicked out from under 
the stock market. A big one: support from foreign buyers. As long 
as the dollar was strong against foreign currencies, United States 
stocks looked attractive to foreign investors. They poured $116.1 
billion into equities in the first three months of 1998; in the second 
quarter, they bought only $55.4 billion. Now, with the dollar in free 
fall, foreigners are almost certainly fleeing American markets. Japanese 
investors in both stocks and bonds, for example, are big losers, thanks 
to their strengthening currency. Since Aug. 21, when the 30-year Treasury 
bond began its big move up, the dollar has lost 19 percent against 
the yen, more than wiping out the roughly 9 percent a bondholder would 
have made in the period. In those months, the Dow lost 7.5 percent. 
With the dollar down 9 percent against the mark, German investors 
are also hurting. Also contributing to the downturn in stocks are 
the beginnings of what may be a severe credit contraction. The titanic 
borrowings of hedge funds are only just beginning to be unwound. As 
these and other speculators _ including individual investors who are 
heavily leveraged in their stock holdings _ are forced to come up 
with more cash as collateral, they will be forced to sell positions 
in which they may have profits. This could knock down big-name stocks 
that are still up for the year. Now for the positives. Investors are 
no longer eager to buy whenever stocks drop. Ridding the market of 
complacency is good. Other excesses are getting flushed out of the 
system. Hedge funds _ this bull market's version of the investors 
in 1929 who borrowed to buy stocks at 10 cents on the dollar _ are 
being clipped. They have been a destabilizing force in the markets; 
eliminating some will be helpful. The weaker dollar has benefits, 
too. It will help make the exports of American companies more affordable 
overseas, possibly bolstering corporate profits. A strong Japanese 
yen, meanwhile, will forestall the potential for another deadly round 
of currency devaluations in the Pacific Rim. If the yield on the 30-year 
Treasury bond continues to strengthen against shorter-term notes, 
as it did at the end of the week, that could aid the market, too. 
Banks now can lend at rates that are considerably higher than their 
borrowing costs. Since banks have led the market both up and down 
this year, a turnaround there will have an upbeat effect over all. 
Economic gloom and doom on mass-market magazine covers is another 
good sign. When these folks discover a bull or bear market, the trend 
is usually about to end. Tom McClellan, editor of the McClellan Market 
Report in Lakewood, Wash., finds today's market strikingly similar 
to that of 1988-91. Stock prices, he says, are ``in the neighborhood'' 
of a bottom. He also says that since 1940, stocks have typically hit 
their depths around midterm elections. None of this means, of course, 
that we are out of the woods. Indeed, at week's end, the average New 
York Stock Exchange stock was down 40 percent from the July peak; 
the average NASDAQ stock was down 55 percent. Yet favorite stocks 
like Dell Computer, Microsoft and Intel were still well off their 
lows. This suggests some downside ahead. Still, bear markets usually 
end with a thunder clap, on a day of panic selling and investor exhaustion. 
Such a day has not yet happened. When it does, hello bulls. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>