<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0451 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sometime in early January, Paul Rosenzweig, a lawyer working for Kenneth 
Starr, received a tip from a law school classmate that President Clinton 
was having an affair with a White House intern, lawyers familiar with 
the matter say. The phone call to Rosenzweig was placed by Jerome 
Marcus, a Philadelphia lawyer who has done legal work that supported 
the sexual misconduct lawsuit filed by Paula Jones against the president. 
The lawyers said the call was placed at least a week before the office 
of Starr, the Whitewater independent counsel, was contacted by Linda 
Tripp, a Pentagon employee who secretly recorded 20 hours of conversations 
with Monica Lewinsky, the former White House intern. The early tip-off 
to Starr's office has been seized upon by lawyers for Clinton, who 
say ``troubling questions'' have been raised about connections between 
the Jones case and the Lewinsky investigation, which led to an impeachment 
inquiry. They point to a timetable that suggests that lawyers assisting 
Mrs. Jones in her case had alerted Starr's prosecutors to the Lewinsky 
affair before Mrs. Tripp contacted them on Jan. 12. Almost since its 
inception, Starr's involvement in the Lewinsky matter has drawn criticism 
from supporters of Clinton, who argue that it was an attempt to build 
a powerful criminal case from a weak civil suit and therefore an abuse 
of the criminal justice system. Starr's prosecutors have long contended 
that they did not know Mrs. Tripp had ties to the Jones case, and 
have tried to distance themselves from the civil suit. Rosenzweig 
and Marcus, both 38, were classmates at the University of Chicago 
Law School, and both graduated in the mid-1980s after serving as editors 
of the school's law review. They are also both members of the Federalist 
Society, a conservative legal organization whose events Starr has 
attended. Neither Rosenzweig nor Marcus returned phone messages this 
week. Charles Bakaly, a spokesman for Starr, also did not return calls 
Friday. But he has previously described the tip as ``vague.'' White 
House lawyers say the early call is noteworthy because it may have 
given Starr's deputies time to develop a strategy for persuading the 
Justice Department to allow prosecutors to expand the scope of their 
stalled Whitewater inquiry. On Jan. 15, Starr's lawyers pointed to 
the efforts of the president's friend Vernon Jordan to find jobs for 
both Ms. Lewinsky and the convicted former Justice Department official 
Webster Hubbell. Mrs. Tripp also brought to Starr the so-called talking 
points, in which Ms. Lewinsky instructed her to lie in the Jones case. 
(Ms. Lewinsky testified months later that she had typed the notes 
herself.) On Jan. 16, the Justice Department referred the matter to 
a three-judge panel, which immediately authorized an expansion of 
Starr's inquiry. Clinton's lawyers have complained about the connections 
between Marcus and Richard Porter, a partner in Starr's old law firm, 
Kirkland &AMP; Ellis of Chicago. Mrs. Tripp was eventually referred 
to James Moody, a Washington lawyer who is also a member of the Federalist 
Society. Bakaly, the spokesman for Starr, has declined to identify 
the lawyer in the independent counsel's office who received the call. 
There is no mention of the early tip-off in the report Starr gave 
to Congress. Attorney General Janet Reno said on Thursday that she 
would review a request by Clinton's personal lawyer, David Kendall, 
to release Starr's written request for expanded jurisdiction. Starr 
has attacked Kendall's letter for focusing on people outside his office. 
Marcus and Porter worked with Lucianne Goldberg, a New York literary 
agent, to help Mrs. Tripp alert Starr's office about the Lewinsky 
matter. Ms. Goldberg has adamantly denied statements made by Starr's 
office that she herself had steered Mrs. Tripp to prosecutors last 
January. She accused Starr's prosecutors of mischaracterizing her 
role. ``I'm being hung out to dry here and I don't like it,'' she 
said. However, she acknowledged that she had spoken with both Marcus 
and Porter in early January about how to help Mrs. Tripp contact Starr. 
Ms. Goldberg has described Marcus as ``a cutout'' brought into the 
matter to keep Porter's role obscured because of his close ties to 
Starr. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>