<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0265 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After years of lagging behind pure equity funds, balanced mutual funds 
are suddenly looking a lot more attractive. Balanced funds, which 
hold a mixture of stocks and bonds, tend to underperform during bull 
markets, but their bond holdings can salvage some returns when equities 
head south. Think of them as a good hedge against an overheated stock 
market or a global recession. ``Any time risk is that high in equities, 
it's always a good idea to look at less risky alternatives, and balanced 
funds fall into that category,'' said Norman G. Fosback, editor of 
the Mutual Fund Forecaster, a newsletter in Deerfield Beach, Fla. 
``Balanced funds, as a class, are extremely attractive.'' Still, the 
class includes a lot of individual differences. Some balanced funds 
are split between two managers _ one for the stock assets, one for 
the bonds. The funds can also have a fixed or variable asset split 
and enormously different objectives. The first trick in picking a 
balanced fund is to understand its exposure to the stock market as 
well as its interest-rate risk from bonds. The average balanced fund 
lost 6.7 percent in the third quarter _ a return not so good as the 
1.8 percent gain for the average bond fund but far better than the 
13.4 percent slide of the average stock fund, according to Morningstar 
Inc., the financial publisher in Chicago. Balanced funds are about 
half as volatile as stock mutual funds _ but for unwary investors, 
certain balanced funds may be riskier than a conservative stock fund. 
In fact, some balanced funds are not very balanced. Portfolio managers 
may make big bets on the stock market, or even on certain types of 
stocks. Avondale Total Return, for example, has almost 86 percent 
of its assets in stocks and just 9 percent in bonds. The Berger Balanced 
fund, by contrast, has 50 percent of its assets in stocks, 18 percent 
in bonds and the rest in cash. In a down market, such differences 
between funds can produce a vast gulf in results. For the year through 
Sept. 30, Avondale's 1.7 percent return was far below Berger's 13.7 
percent. The types of stocks in a balanced fund can also throw performance 
out of kilter. Consider the Smith Barney Security and Growth fund, 
which has a nearly 50-50 split between stocks and bonds. The fund 
may look evenly balanced, but the majority of its stock holdings are 
in small companies, which are getting hammered in this market _ as 
is the fund, down 9.4 percent through the third quarter of this year. 
While balanced funds as a group are known for their stability, certain 
funds still change the weightings in their portfolios radically and 
quickly. Provident Investment Counsel Pinnacle Balanced, for example, 
has cut its stock holdings to about 62 percent, from 74 percent in 
July, according to Jeffrey Miller, managing director of the fund. 
It has returned 12.7 percent this year through Sept. 30. Alliance 
Growth Investors is another balanced fund that has unloaded stocks. 
Nicholas D. Carn, the portfolio manager, recently cut his equity holdings 
to 55 percent, from 68 percent in July and 82 percent in January. 
``Obviously, the high stock exposure is one of the things that has 
helped our performance'' in the bull market, he said. The fund returned 
5 percent in the first three quarters. Investors looking for a less 
risky balanced fund, he said, can put their money in Alliance Conservative 
Investors, which has only about 23 percent of its holdings in stocks 
and returned 6.8 percent in the period. While bonds give these funds 
more stability, they have their own risks. The longer the bonds' maturities, 
the higher the interest-rate risk. Long-term bonds usually pay higher 
interest rates than short-term bonds, but if rates rise, a fund dominated 
by long-term bonds is locked in at a lower rate of return. Interest 
rates have fallen recently because investors, fearing that the economic 
collapses of Asia and Russia might spread, have retreated to the safety 
of the United States Treasury bond market. That has driven up prices, 
pushing down yields, which move in the opposite direction. Balanced 
funds can hold many different types of bonds _ corporate and municipal, 
as well as Treasury _ with varying maturities. The Mainstay Total 
Return B fund, for example, is holding bonds with an average maturity 
of 13.2 years, while Avondale Total Return is holding short-term debt 
with an average maturity of two years. For the first three quarters, 
Mainstay's 7.8 percent gain beat Avondale's return by more than 6 
percentage points. ``Balanced funds are usually sold as conservative 
investments, but if you've got a fund that is concentrated in small 
stocks and long-term bonds, you don't have a conservative product,'' 
said Steve M. Lipper, senior vice president at Lipper Analytical Services, 
the research firm in Summit, N.J. Mutual fund experts caution investors 
to read the current and past semiannual reports to see what kind of 
securities a fund is holding and the changes the portfolio has made. 
An investor's tax bracket will also influence her choice of balanced 
mutual funds. One option for investors in the top brackets is USAA 
Growth and Tax Strategy, a fund with about 51 percent of its assets 
in tax-free bonds and 49 percent in growth stocks. It returned 2.8 
percent in the first three quarters. Then, of course, there is always 
another option. Sheldon Jacobs, editor of the No Load Fund Investor, 
a newsletter in Irvington, N.Y., recommends that investors do their 
own portfolio balancing by buying separate stock and bond funds. That, 
he said, gives them more control over the amount and types of stocks 
they are holding and enables them to plan their tax gains and losses 
more effectively. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>