<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With polls showing the Republican Jeb Bush still a commanding front-runner 
in the election for Florida governor, the underdog Democratic candidate, 
Lt. Gov. Kenneth MacKay, wasted no time on niceties this week in the 
first of three scheduled debates. MacKay opened his remarks by attacking 
Bush for failed business deals, as well as for supporting school vouchers 
and for opposing gun control and abortion. But in this unusually lackluster 
race in what is ordinarily a competitive two-party state, yearnings 
for new leadership for a new millennium seem to be figuring more prominently 
as a deciding factor among voters than any particular issue, or candidate's 
liability. ``People feel in general that it's time for a change,'' 
said Jay Malina, chairman of the Greater Miami Chamber of Commerce 
and one of the candidates' questioners in a televised debate Thursday 
in Orlando that had audience participation from three other Florida 
cities. The latest poll by Florida Voter, a nonpartisan polling organization 
in Fort Lauderdale, shows Bush leading by 17 percentage points, 55 
percent to MacKay's 38 percent, with only 7 percent of respondents 
undecided. The same September poll found that only 31 percent of Floridians 
said they were interested in the race, a sign that most voters have 
not tuned in, just weeks before they are due at the polls. Political 
analysts say the numbers attest to Bush's success in reinventing himself 
over the last four years after losing to the Democratic governor, 
Lawton Chiles, by only 64,000 votes out of more than 4 million cast 
in 1994. A Miami businessman and son of former President George Bush, 
he has campaigned relentlessly in Democratic strongholds he once ignored, 
toned down conservative talk and stayed away from divisive issues 
to broaden his appeal. But Bush, 45, is also younger and more photogenic 
than the 65-year-old MacKay, an advantage he seemed to exploit during 
the debate Thursday by punctuating his answers with smiles and saying 
in closing remarks that he offered ``the passion and the energy to 
make a difference.'' MacKay, in turn, portrayed the election as ``a 
choice between a person who has a proven record and experienced leadership 
in the state, and a person who is very articulate but who's untried.'' 
Susan MacManus, a political science professor at the University of 
South Florida in Tampa, said: ``It's Florida's version of the Dole-Clinton 
race. It's the same chemistry. The young and the old, and the perception 
of vigor and youth and a new vision.'' MacKay, a well-liked former 
state legislator and congressman who has served as Chiles' lieutenant 
governor since 1990, is also dogged by what most accounts have seen 
as a disorganized campaign and by the troubles of a Democratic Party 
that antagonized its black constituents when Democratic state representatives 
kept a black legislator from becoming their leader. MacKay has not 
been able to galvanize registered Democrats in a state where they 
dominate Republicans 45 percent to 40 percent, or even win over those 
who agree with his position on issues like abortion. The Florida Voter 
poll found that among voters who support abortion rights, as MacKay 
does, he leads over Bush by only one percentage point. During an hourlong 
debate in which all the questions came from studio audiences and covered 
a wide variety of subjects, MacKay tried to focus on Bush's negatives, 
like his share of campaign money from oil, tobacco and gambling interests 
_ ``What were these people promised in exchange for that money?'' 
he repeatedly asked _ and on the differences between the two candidates 
in a campaign with no overriding electoral issue except perhaps the 
poor performance of the state's public schools. Bush supports school 
vouchers that would allow parents access to private schools as an 
incentive for overall school improvement, but MacKay opposes the vouchers 
because he says public schools would end up stigmatized. There was 
no mention of the White House scandal. During a lively exchange, MacKay 
handed Bush a copy of a school prayer bill vetoed by Chiles, pressing 
him to take a stand on the issue. ( Bush did not.) The front-runner 
Bush mostly ignored the attacks, repeatedly saying that ``we can do 
better'' without offering many specifics, and defending himself against 
the accusation that he would be beholden to special-interest money 
by saying that ``my principles are rock solid.'' ``My mother has been 
more mean to me than Buddy MacKay was,'' Bush later told reporters. 
Friday, while Bush campaigned in Jacksonville, MacKay swept through 
Palm Beach County, a liberal Democratic stronghold, with the governor 
in tow. He found a receptive crowd at the Century Village West retirement 
community in Boca Raton, where Democrats promised to turn out the 
vote. ``I'm very hopeful,'' said Isabella Fink, 81, a vice president 
of the local Democratic club. ``We're going to push it up. I believe 
we'll make it. He's a good, qualified person. He's not trading on 
his father's name. The truth is, this man knows the business of government 
and that's important.'' At least publicly, MacKay remains optimistic 
too. ``I think there's a pile of undecided voters, a whole bunch of 
people who are just beginning to focus on this race,'' he said after 
the debate. ``I think you're going to see the polls closing, I really 
do. I think we can win this race.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>