<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ah, excuse me. I don't mean to interrupt the fun Congress is having 
with its impeachment hearings and all. But, well, there's just this 
little problem going on in the rest of the world. It has to do with 
economics. You see, the world's first truly global economy is going 
through its first truly serious global crisis. If you follow the global 
credit crunch and market declines as they are displayed on graphs 
on a Bloomberg machine, they each look like an EKG tracking a massive 
heart attack. So, you know, we might want to talk about it. I mean, 
not all the time. Maybe just in between the impeachment hearings and 
the release of the next Tripp tapes. Like I said, I don't mean to 
interrupt ... BUT HAVE WE GONE NUTS??? We are not just heading for 
lower growth, and possibly a recession. We are seeing at minimum a 
slowdown and at a maximum a breakdown in the whole progression toward 
free-market capitalism. That progression has enormously benefited 
Americans and millions of people in emerging markets, where $350 billion 
has been invested over the past decade. Yes, some of that investing 
was done without proper regard to the risks, as banks, mutual funds 
and individuals indiscriminately chased higher and higher yields anywhere 
in the world. Unfortunately, what is happening now is that those same 
investors are, without any distinctions between good and bad countries, 
pulling their money out in pursuit of lower and lower risks, putting 
all their money into T-bills or a mattress. The net result is to choke 
off credit to everyone, from bad Russian banks to good Brazilian factories 
to promising American start-up companies, in a way that can only lead 
to misery and unemployment. As the vice chairman of Goldman Sachs 
International, Robert Hormats, says, ``We have not seen a withdrawal 
of liquidity this big from the Third World since the good lord parted 
the Red Sea to let the children of Israel walk through.'' Meanwhile, 
the Republican-led Congress is having a grand time, recklessly dragging 
out the impeachment of the president until Christmas _ and it's not 
even clear which Christmas. This is not to say that because of this 
financial crisis we must ignore President Clinton's horrendous personal 
behavior. But it is to say we've got to recognize that the global 
context that existed when this affair first erupted has fundamentally 
changed. You may not know that from watching CNN or MSNBC, with their 
24-hour-a-day impeach-a-tainment shows. But it has. And it has changed 
into a global crisis that requires enormous political leadership in 
general and U.S. leadership in particular. It is time, therefore, 
to take Gerald Ford's advice and work out a censure plea bargain between 
Clinton, Kenneth Starr and Congress and be done with this affair _ 
now. Last week the dollar fell by 20 Japanese yen in two days. That 
is the sort of volatility you expect in the Mexican peso. It just 
doesn't happen with the dollar. It is like seeing a cat fly. When 
panicked markets overshoot this badly, you have to overshoot them 
right back. What is needed now are some holy-cow, in-your-face, stick-this-in-your-portfolio-and-smoke-it, 
confidence-building measures by the U.S., Europe and Japan to break 
the negative psychology of the markets and stoke up some real worldwide 
demand. That requires, among other things, a U.S. president able to 
galvanize the process, explain it and press it forward. It also requires 
a steep drop in the key interest rate by the Federal Reserve from 
the current level of 5.25 percent; an incremental drop won't do it. 
And it may require using some of the budget surplus for a tax cut. 
It also requires a cut in German-European interest rates. And it certainly 
requires an emergency cleanup of the bankrupt Japanese banking system. 
The real systemic threat to the global economy today is the continuing 
risk of large-scale bank failures in Japan. This is not a test, folks. 
If this credit crunch continues it will have enormously destabilizing 
effects. Because on the one hand the world is telling developing countries 
to reform their economies, clean up their banks and get their financial 
software up to Western standards. And on the other hand, it is telling 
them that they are going to have to do this with much, much less capital 
from the developed countries, or with much, much higher interest rates 
at home. That is a prescription for political explosions all over 
the world. Like I said, I didn't mean to interrupt ... 
</TEXT>
</DOC>