<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0507 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bond traders nicknamed Long-Term Capital Management ``Salomon North,'' 
a reference to the many partners in the Greenwich, Conn., hedge fund 
who were veterans of Salomon Brothers. But a more apt choice might 
have been ``MIT South.'' The people _ and the mathematical ``rocket 
science'' _ at the core of the elite hedge fund had strong ties to 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the working atmosphere 
was far closer to the studied tranquillity of academia than to a frenetic 
trading floor. Even the setting in wealthy, quiet Greenwich was chosen 
to contrast with the gray skyscrapers and crowded, narrow streets 
of Manhattan's financial district. The partners, many of whom had 
mined those financial canyons for tens of millions of dollars, traded 
suits and ties for polo shirts and chinos, preferring to relieve stress 
with a game of pool or a fishing break. The mood was collegial, recalled 
Peter van Rijssen, a recent college graduate who spent a pleasant 
three months as a $17-an-hour temp at Long-Term Capital in the summer 
of 1996. ``Everyone was extremely friendly, from the boss on down,'' 
he said. ``It was very calm and ordered.'' That order was shattered 
last month as Long-Term Capital ran out of money and was deemed too 
big to fail without disrupting the global financial markets, leading 
to an emergency $3.6 billion capital infusion by a consortium of brokerage 
firms and banks organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
As the winds of turmoil strip away some of the firm's secrecy, a portrait 
emerges of a group of highly analytical, extremely rational former 
academics who believed they had created a mathematical trading model 
to withstand the sharpest gyrations of the global marketplace. In 
hindsight, their lack of trading instincts and their adherence to 
numerical models _ which showed that their bets would eventually pay 
off _ kept them from understanding the gravity of their situation 
until it was too late. So certain were they of the firm's infallibility 
that they kept virtually all their money in the fund, treating it 
as a checking account, and borrowed money to increase their personal 
stakes in it. Some expected to attain riches that would put them on 
a par with the wealthiest dynasties in America. One of the 16 partners, 
Lawrence E. Hilibrand, an MIT graduate who earned $23 million at Salomon 
in 1990, borrowed $24 million last year to increase his investment 
in the fund. Now Hilibrand, his partners and many of firm's 180 employees 
are scrambling to avoid financial ruin and anguishing over the damage 
they have inflicted to themselves and their investors. ``Our wealth 
has been knocked down to zero in many cases,'' said a person involved 
with the firm. ``But most of us came from backgrounds of academics 
and teaching, and it wasn't too long ago that we didn't have much.'' 
Of course, many of them have long become accustomed to the trappings 
of wealth. The partners at Long-Term Capital have laid low, generally 
declining requests for interviews. ``They have always been extraordinarily 
secretive and didn't want to be in any publication,'' said Antoine 
Bernheim, who could not even get enough information to include Long-Term 
Capital in his annual hedge fund directory. But several people involved 
with the firm agreed to speak on condition that their names be withheld. 
John W. Meriwether, a pioneer in betting on fluctuations in bond prices, 
a strategy known as bond arbitrage, recruited many of the finest minds 
in finance, most from his former firm, Salomon Brothers, to create 
Long-Term Capital in 1993. They shared an intellectual approach to 
the world of trading, one that flowed from their backgrounds in academia 
and their doctorates in finance. ``These guys are among the best and 
the brightest,'' said William A. McIntosh, a former Salomon partner 
and a former colleague of many Long-Term Capital principals. The partners 
``tried not to react to things too quickly,'' said one person involved 
since the early days. ``We have tried to study things very carefully. 
We have tried to do it very slowly.'' That strategy was well suited 
to the good times but would come back to haunt the partners when market 
volatility outstripped their ability to react. Among the fund's original 
partners were two academics who had spent time at MIT and who would 
later share a Nobel Prize, Myron S. Scholes of Stanford University 
and Robert C. Merton of Harvard University, whose groundbreaking work 
in 1973 had turned risk management into a science and opened up Wall 
Street to the era of ``rocket scientists,'' the mathematics and physics 
whizzes who trade according to formulas instead of hunches. Scholes, 
whose Greenwich house overlooks Indian Harbor on a private road, played 
a key role in soliciting money for the original fund, according to 
one fund investor. ``At the presentation, he was just the brightest 
guy I'd ever heard,'' the investor said. ``It was a collection of 
uniquely intelligent men.'' The rocket scientists included Eric R. 
Rosenfeld, a former professor at the Harvard Business School who had 
been a managing director at Salomon, and Gregory D. Hawkins, another 
former Salomon managing director and a former finance professor at 
the University of California at Berkeley. Like Hilibrand, Rosenfeld 
and Hawkins did graduate work at MIT when Merton was on the faculty 
there. Scholes did his pioneering work while a junior faculty member 
at MIT. David W. Mullins Jr., who left the No. 2 spot at the Federal 
Reserve Board to join the venture, received his doctorate from MIT 
at the same time Scholes was teaching there. Later, two others with 
MIT connections joined Long-Term Capital: David M. Modest, who had 
moved to Berkeley as a finance professor after graduating from MIT, 
and Chi-Fu Huang, an expert on creating models for swap contracts, 
financial instruments designed to take advantage of currency, bond 
and other price differences. Success came fast. The firm, which is 
organized as a limited partnership with a minimum investment of $10 
million, began trading in February 1994 and produced a net return 
of 20 percent that year, 43 percent in 1995 and 41 percent in 1996. 
In the first three years, investors more than doubled their money, 
far better than they would have done in a typical American stock fund. 
The fees that the firm charged investors were hefty, too _ a 2 percent 
management fee and a 25 percent annual ``incentive'' fee, both well 
above those of other firms _ but no one was complaining. Along with 
attracting money from wealthy individuals and institutions, the partners 
contributed about $150 million of their own money to the investment 
pool and then treated the fund like a private bank. ``Some months 
they would withdraw $10,000, and when they had a big purchase, they 
would take out more,'' said one person involved with the firm. Some 
purchases were big, indeed, befitting risk takers who were reaping 
big rewards. Some of the partners had bought into a golf course in 
Ireland. Others began to learn about wine and developed a taste for 
$100-a-bottle Burgundies, like Gevrey-Chambertin. Meriwether, a top 
earner on Wall Street for 15 years, already owned a 67-acre estate 
in Westchester County, N.Y. But even after earning $23 million in 
1990 at Salomon Brothers, Hilibrand and his family remained in a $1 
million colonial on about an acre in Scarsdale, N.Y. In 1996, though, 
he and his wife, Deborah, paid $2.1 million for a 15-acre lot in a 
gated development in northwest Greenwich and began to build a $4 million 
home, according to records on file with the town's division of buildings. 
Construction is nearly completed, and the builder said recently that 
no one had told him to stop work. Hilibrand shuns interviews and refused 
to have his photograph taken when he was a managing director at Salomon. 
Friends describe him as a political libertarian and say he is obsessed 
with his privacy. Hilibrand is one of at least four Long-Term Capital 
partners who took out personal loans, secured by their shares in the 
firm, to increase their investments in the portfolio, according to 
people involved in the transactions. His loans are the largest, at 
$24 million. Hans U. Hufschmid, who received $18 million in compensation 
from Salomon in 1993, according to a former firm official, also borrowed 
heavily. People involved with the firm said Hufschmid, a foreign-exchange 
expert who works out of the firm's London office, had borrowed $14.6 
million to increase his fund equity. Now Hilibrand and Hufschmid are 
negotiating with creditors from Credit Lyonnais and other banks to 
reschedule their debts and to persuade lenders to take a claim on 
future earnings, say bankers and others involved in the talks. It 
is probably too soon to say whether anyone will be pushed into personal 
bankruptcy. ``If banks require them to pay it today, they can't pay 
it,'' said one person involved in the firm's finances. ``Their assets 
must stay in the fund. They also have other liquid things in their 
names. I believe everything can be worked out.'' At the very least, 
the fabulous wealth has evaporated, and some partners may lose everything 
they have accumulated in recent years, from mansions to wine cellars. 
``If people have to sell their homes, it's not the end of the world,'' 
said the person involved in the finances. Scholes may have at least 
some money outside the fund. After he and Merton shared the $1 million 
for the Nobel economics prize in 1997, Scholes told a reporter that 
he would not be investing his portion in the hedge fund. ``I thought 
about that,'' he told Institutional Investor magazine. ``But I think 
it's in bad taste.'' For some lower-level employees, the collapse 
of the firm means more than just lost wealth. A couple of days after 
the Sept. 23 bailout, a trader entered the office of one partner and 
began to weep. He said he feared that he would have to cancel his 
wedding because he had been wiped out, said a person who witnessed 
the scene. The partners' decision to hang on to their market positions 
even as their capital evaporated and markets turned against them was 
completely in tune with their ``take it slow'' character. Trouble 
became apparent in May, when the portfolio lost 6.5 percent. In June, 
it lost 10 percent, leaving it down 5 percent for the first half of 
1998, its first period in the red, according to people involved with 
the firm. The cataclysm came on Aug. 17, when Russia devalued its 
currency and halted payments on its debt, sending bond prices down 
almost across-the-board. Only United States Treasury securities were 
spared as investors decided safety was everything. Nearly every big 
investment house and bank that trades bonds took a hit, but Long-Term 
Capital was devastated because its positions were spread across the 
globe and it had invested as much as $100 billion in borrowed money. 
By the end of August, the portfolio was down 44 percent for the month 
and 52 percent for the year. After failed attempts to raise more money, 
the partners agreed to a rescue in late September by the consortium 
of 14 brokerage firms and banks. In exchange for an infusion of $3.6 
billion in capital, the equity of the investors, including the partners 
and employees, was reduced to 10 percent and tight restrictions were 
set on their ability to withdraw funds. For the moment, Long-Term 
Capital, rescued by its nervous creditors, has narrowly avoided a 
meltdown, and its partners with big debts, like Hilibrand and Hufschmid, 
seem sanguine about avoiding bankruptcy. Things could still get worse 
_ if the financial markets eat away at the fund's capital and the 
rescue falls apart _ but the bulk of the risk has been shifted from 
Greenwich back to Wall Street, no small bit of rocket science itself. 
``There is an old axiom in the restructuring business: If you're going 
to fail, then fail very big,'' said Thomas Maloney, a partner at Cleary 
Gottlieb Steen &AMP; Hamilton. That way, he explained, your creditors 
have to bail you out. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>