<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0430 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Senate Friday unanimously approved a compromise bill that would 
require the government to deal with countries that persecute citizens 
for religious beliefs by using measures ranging from the mildest private 
rebuke to tough economic sanctions. The bill, the International Religious 
Freedom Act, would not force the president to impose automatic sanctions 
but would allow him to decide whether and how to act against violators. 
It would require the State Department to issue annual reports of each 
country's record on religious freedom, and would require the president 
to take action based on those reviews. As a check on the administration, 
the bill would create a 10-member independent commission that would 
publish its own review of religious liberties country-by-country. 
``The tragic reality is that literally millions of religious believers 
elsewhere in the world live under constant, oppressive fear at the 
prospect of being arrested, imprisoned, tortured or even killed, simply 
for their religious faith,'' said Sen. Don Nickles of Oklahoma, the 
Republican whip. The bill grew from an effort more than a year ago 
by the Christian Coalition and other conservative religious groups 
to require the government to step up its fight against religious persecution 
from Sudan to China. It struck a chord in the corridors of Capitol 
Hill as well as in churches and synagogues across the country, and 
was soon embraced by religious organizations including the Episcopal 
Church and the American Jewish Committee. ``No government has the 
right to tell people how to worship and certainly not the right to 
discriminate against them or persecute them for the way in which they 
choose to express their faith in God,'' said Sen. Joseph Lieberman, 
D-Conn. But it took weeks of closed-door negotiations before the Senate 
Friday approved a compromise measure, 98-0. The negotiators agreed 
to give the president greater discretion in determining which penalities 
to impose on countries. Senate leaders whisked the bill to the House, 
where speedy approval is expected this weekend. Administration officials 
said Clinton would sign the bill, reversing earlier threats of a veto. 
Passage of the legislation would fulfill a promise that House and 
Senate Republican leaders made earlier this year to conservative religious 
groups, handing conservatives a rare legislative accomplishment to 
campaign on with the congressional elections less than a month away. 
Nickles said the bill's supporters were not ``trying to score points'' 
but rather to ``change the behavior of countries around the world 
to allow more religious freedoms.'' Supporters of the legislation 
cited a stream of gruesome incidents _ from the killing of Christians 
in Pakistan and Sudan to the torture of Tibetan Buddhist monks _ as 
evidence that stricter measures were needed. The overwhelming support 
for the legislation masked differences among Republicans over the 
bill. Social conservatives like the Christian Coalition say the measure 
is essential to protect religious freedom worldwide. But moderates 
and business groups, like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, say the bill's 
sanctions would alienate important diplomatic and trade partners. 
``While well-intended, this bill could easily become counterproductive 
to U.S. interests and foreign policy objectives,'' said Frank Kittredge, 
vice chairman of USA Engage, a coalition of 676 small and large business, 
farm groups and trade organizations. Administration officials took 
advantage of the Republican divisions, and of the eagerness of Republican 
leaders to produce a bill before Congress adjourns in the next few 
days, to wring the last-minute concessions. ``The bill advances the 
cause of religious freedom and gives the president the flexibility 
he needs without undermining relations with important countries around 
the world,'' said Stuart Eizenstat, an undersecretary of state who 
was the administration's chief negotiator with Congress on the measure. 
The legislation calls for the State Department to conduct annual reviews 
of religious freedoms just as the department does now on human rights. 
The bill would create a new office within the State Department, headed 
by an official with ambassadorial rank, to monitor religious liberties. 
Based on those reports and other information, the administration would 
determine whether a country violated citizens' religious beliefs and 
should be punished. The toughest economic sanctions, including U.S. 
opposition to loans by international financial institutions, would 
be imposed only on countries that engaged in ``systematic, on-going 
and egregious'' violations like torture or imprisonment. The president 
would be allowed to waive sanctions for ``national interests'' or 
if the administration deemed that the penalties might provoke a popular 
backlash against religious minorities. Relief aid would be exempt 
from sanctions. The independent commission mandated by the bill would 
publish its own review of religious liberties. ``Although I am not 
eager to enact a new sanctions law, I believe we are setting an important 
precedent with this bill in terms of what should be contained in any 
sanctions law,'' said Sen. Joseph R. Biden Jr., D-Del. Administration 
officials and the bill's two chief sponsors, Nickles and Lieberman, 
hammered out the final details late on Wednesday, Eizenstat said. 
In late September, Nickles altered his original bill to win the support 
of two Republicans, Chuck Hagel of Nebraska and Rod Grams of Minnesota, 
who had bottled up the legislation in committee. ``This is a bill 
that will focus America's attention on the desire to advance religious 
freedom around the world while doing no harm to America's national 
security, diplomatic or economic interests abroad,'' Hagel said. Senate 
passage of the legislation culminated more than a year of congressional 
action on the measure, which has been considerably softened over time. 
In May the House voted, 375-41, to impose automatic sanctions against 
countries that permit or endorse a pattern of violent attacks or other 
persecution against religious believers. But the House bill faced 
immediate and immovable opposition in the Senate because of Republican 
resistance to automatic economic sanctions. Senators also complained 
that the original House bill would indiscriminately sanction close 
allies like Saudi Arabia, Germany, Israel and Greece. Faced with what 
they considered a weaker bill or no bill at all, House leaders quickly 
embraced the Senate version. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>