<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0236 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So what ever happened to the new economy? It was only months ago that 
economists had difficulty seeing any credible threats to an expansion 
that began in 1991 and begat a stock market that recognized no ceiling. 
So heady was the ride that economists and fiscal policy-makers from 
Alan Greenspan down were pondering whether the United States had entered 
a golden era _ one in which business investments in technology were 
driving a resurgence in productivity and gains in productivity were 
making strong growth and low unemployment possible without inflation. 
Well, inflation is still dormant, and the unemployment rate, while 
inching up, is still near a quarter-century low. But growth is suddenly 
looking fragile, so much so that economists began talking seriously 
last week about whether a recession was in the cards for the United 
States. But even if the outlook has changed abruptly for the worse, 
there is undeniably still something new and uncharted in this economy. 
After all, most periods of economic expansion end when the Federal 
Reserve is forced to raise interest rates to squelch inflation. But 
this expansion is at risk because of an altogether more elusive phenomenon: 
rapidly changing investor psychology. What Greenspan, the chairman 
of the Federal Reserve, labeled ``irrational exuberance'' less than 
two years ago has given way to fear and pessimism of equally dubious 
rationality. ``I had argued, in fact quite extensively over the last 
two or three years, that the markets were becoming too complacent 
about risk,'' Greenspan said last week. ``Well, that has changed,'' 
he said to a wave of laughter from his audience of economists. ``If 
there was a dime to turn on, it did. And it has been a fairly dramatic, 
broad and as yet seemingly incomplete adjustment.'' The effects have 
been well documented. Since Russia in effect defaulted on its debt 
in mid-August, investors have been diving for the foxholes. Money 
has been pouring into U.S. Treasury securities, and credit has become 
more expensive and difficult to get, not just for developing nations 
but for corporate borrowers as well. The squeeze has hardly stopped 
the economy dead in its tracks. The United States also continues to 
benefit from what Brian Wesbury, an economist at Griffin, Kubik, Stephens 
&AMP; Thompson in Chicago, called a ``tremendous productivity performance'' 
that is providing ``a good foundation'' for an eventual rebound. Still, 
a true credit crunch would quickly spill over into the real economy, 
which is why Greenspan is clearly so concerned. Should investors and 
lenders become even more nervous, the problem could force businesses 
to cut back their plans for expansion and modernization, undercutting 
a primary force behind the economy's strength. Moreover, Greenspan 
is worried that the downturn in the stock market could scare consumers 
into cutting back on spending. And if both consumers and businesses 
feel compelled to retrench, the economy could lose steam quickly. 
What the economy faces is, as much as anything, a crisis of confidence. 
Psychology _ in the markets, among consumers, in politics _ is a perilous 
subject for economists and policy-makers. It lacks any certain predictability, 
and there is no model or playbook for dealing with it. Indeed, William 
Dudley, an economist at Goldman, Sachs, says the most obvious tool 
available to policy-makers _ cuts in interest rates _ may not be of 
much help at this point. The sectors of the economy that are sensitive 
to interest rates, particularly housing, are already robust. And the 
rates that are set by the markets already reflect expectations of 
further rate cuts by the Fed, and so are unlikely to fall much more 
from their already low levels. ``This is the most bizarre business 
cycle we've ever had,'' Dudley said. ``The Fed doesn't have a good 
template for this.'' And the Clinton administration has, in effect, 
taken fiscal policy off the table as a means of stimulating the economy. 
President Clinton's demand that the federal budget surplus be left 
untouched until Social Security's financing problems are addressed 
succeeded in thwarting Republican plans for a big tax cut this year. 
But it also forced fiscal policy to remain contractionary at a time 
when the economy appears to be slowing. Greenspan and Treasury Secretary 
Robert Rubin have been heaped with praise over the last few years 
for their steady economic stewardship. Their credibility with the 
financial markets is unmatched, and they have proved deft at balancing 
political and policy pressures from at home and abroad to keep the 
U.S. economy on an even keel. But both are probably approaching the 
final chapters in their careers in public service. Their legacies 
are likely to rest not only on how they handled the good times the 
country enjoyed for most of this decade, but also on their success 
in using their clout and credibility to keep the current expansion 
going. And given the nature of the threat, that may prove a daunting 
task even for the likes of them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>