<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0274 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Why is that man on the stage? He's not even an actor, for heaven's 
sake, only a playwright, and everyone knows how exciting they are 
these days. And it's not as if he's talking about anything really 
juicy, like personal problems with substance abuse or gender identity, 
or firing off zippy one-liners. His subject, if you please, is the 
irreconcilable differences in the Middle East, something you can read 
about in almost any newspaper any day of the year. Why bother to go 
the to theater? Yet Londoners are flocking to see David Hare, and 
at the Duke of York in the West End, no less, where the author of 
such successful dramas as ``Skylight'' and ``Amy's View'' is performing 
his one-man show, the Royal Court Theater production of ``Via Dolorosa.'' 
What's more, his audiences clearly aren't bored. They shouldn't be. 
As directed by the gifted Stephen Daldry (``An Inspector Calls''), 
Hare shapes a genuinely dramatic event out of his first-person account 
of a journey through Tel Aviv, Jerusalem and the West Bank and of 
his encounters with people representing a jangle of viewpoints. If 
it is not a proper play, it is undoubtedly a piece of theater, meticulously 
staged in a way that doesn't even aspire to spontaneity and yet still 
somehow glows with more passion and provocation than Hare's other 
current hit, ``The Blue Room,'' the bleak sex comedy starring a naked 
Nicole Kidman. Now, can you imagine, for a second, anything comparable 
originating on Broadway? What if, say, Tony Kushner decided to present 
his take on race relations in Boston from the stage of a Schubert 
house? Would anybody come after the first few nights, no matter how 
good it was? What continues to make London theater electric is its 
willingness to challenge audiences, to keep extending its notions 
of what theater can and should consider, and the willingness of audiences 
to accept that challenge. And not just in the so-called fringe houses; 
in the commercial mainstream of the West End as well. The legacy of 
George Bernard Shaw lingers in the salutary notion that a play of 
ideas and a compelling entertainment are not incompatible. At its 
worst, this sensibility gives birth to self-conscious, diagramed debate 
plays like Ronald Harwood's ``Taking Sides,'' seen briefly on Broadway 
two years ago, and Nicholas Wright's ``Mrs. Klein,'' which was a succes 
de scandale off-Broadway as a vehicle for Uta Hagen. But there are 
also thrilling works, by authors from Hare to Tom Stoppard, that ask 
audiences to climb out of their daily mental torpor and enter into 
a reflective dialogue with what's happening onstage, not to be lectured 
to but to become engaged. It is telling that one of the hardest tickets 
to come by at the moment is Michael Frayn's ``Copenhagen,'' which 
devotes long passages to labyrinthine discussions of post-Einstein 
physics. The great English actor Ian McKellen recently ignited furious 
debates within the London theater and its audiences when, in an interview 
in The Independent newspaper, he explained his reasons for leaving 
his country's capital city for a seven-month residency at the West 
Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds. His complaint, he said, was with the 
composition of audiences, specifically at the Royal National Theater, 
the site of much of his best work. ``Do they speak the language?'' 
he asked, referring to the many foreign tourists here. He also pointed 
out that he saw no black faces at a recent performance of ``Oklahoma!,'' 
an ``odd thing in this city in this time.'' McKellen, with the grandstanding 
eloquence that has characterized his real-life role as a figurehead 
for gay rights, announced, ``I've made a vow never to work in a theater 
which forces me to betray the soul of acting.'' McKellen doesn't seem 
to know how good he has had it, at least from a New Yorker's point 
of view. Yes, London is the city that gave us ``Cats'' and its many 
mindless progeny. But it is also the city where American playwright 
Edward Albee has chosen to open his latest work, ``The Play About 
the Baby,'' which is directed by Howard Davies and stars Alan Howard 
and Frances de la Tour. It is, by most standards, a difficult piece, 
with a quartet of nameless, archetypal characters; echoing, mutating 
symbolism, and full-fledged discussions of ontology. A series of dialogues 
among an older couple (Howard and Ms. de la Tour, in impeccable, audience-seducing 
form) and a younger one (the appealingly and appropriately fresh Rupert 
Penry-Jones and Zoe Waites), the play harks back to Albee's early 
days of experimentalism, though the authorial tone has shifted from 
angry young man to rueful older one. Imagine a blueprint for the conflicts 
given fully fleshed life in ``Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?,'' and 
you'll get the idea. ``Baby'' is also, once you give it the chance, 
extremely entertaining, turning the eternally baffling questions of 
life and death, illusion and reality, into a brisk, jaunty vaudeville, 
as funny as it is despairing. (It has full-frontal nudity, too, but 
that seems to be a sine qua non here these days.) While the local 
reviews were decidedly mixed, there is talk of moving ``Baby'' from 
the Almeida Theater in Islington to the West End. Now consider Frayn's 
``Copenhagen,'' at the Cottesloe Theater at the National. This three-character 
drama, seen in a limited engagement at the Long Wharf Theater in New 
Haven earlier this year, is about the moral implications of atomic 
fission and how the principles of modern physics parallel human behavior. 
It is centered on a meeting that took place between the Danish physicist 
Niels Bohr and his onetime protege, the German scientist Werner Heisenberg, 
during World War II. The theories of complementarity (Bohr's) and 
uncertainty (Heisenberg's) are painstakingly characterized and clarified 
through discussion and metaphor. If that's not enough, Frayn has chosen 
to present these knotty subjects ``Rashomon'' style, through the varied 
and differing perspectives of the ghosts of Heisenberg (Matthew Marsh), 
Bohr (David Burke) and Bohr's wife, Margarethe (Sara Kestelman). The 
play is, admittedly, talkier than even George Bernard Shaw, and before 
the evening's end, the actors appear openly exhausted from spewing 
all those words. The exposition can seem embarrassingly labored. (Sample 
line: ``It's like the worst of 1927 all over again, when Niels came 
back from Norway and first read Heisenberg's uncertainty paper.'') 
But the director, Michael Blakemore, and his excellent cast sustain 
a crackling, ominous tension and, more surprisingly, a line of argument 
that even I, who barely got through a college course called Physics 
for Poets, could follow. It was remarkable to find the audience at 
intermission buzzing excitedly while throwing out terms like ``Schroedinger's 
cat.'' Like Hare and Albee, Frayn asks his audience to sit up, stay 
awake and pay attention, to exercise and stretch the mind a bit. If 
you are willing to do that, you won't get lost in any of these productions. 
Albee has often spoken disgustedly of the passivity of American audiences. 
It's true that the dictum of many Broadway theatergoers seems to be, 
``All right, I'm going to sit back and relax now, and you're going 
to make me feel good and forget the world outside,'' as though a play 
were some sort of super geisha. How else to explain the failure of 
such top-notch challenging works as David Mamet's ``Old Neighborhood'' 
or the Broadway revival of Sam Shepard's ``Buried Child''? Unlike 
their Broadway equivalents, London audiences have never fully fallen 
out of the habit of playgoing. A night at the theater doesn't have 
to be a special, occasional event, despite increased ticket prices. 
(A seat for ``Oklahoma!'' can run the equivalent of 60-some dollars.) 
As a consequence, the dialogue between plays and audiences remains 
more fluid, more reciprocal and consequently more in touch with the 
culture at large. It says something that playwrights like Harold Pinter 
and Hare are celebrities in London, the way a philosopher like Bernard-Henri 
Levy is a pop star in Paris. For the record, the only shows I attended 
here at which much of the audience didn't seem to speak English, at 
least as a first language, were two Broadway-style musicals, the clunky 
``Saturday Night Fever'' and the flaccid ``Whistle Down the Wind.'' 
The latter, which opened and closed in Washington before reopening 
in a revised form here, is the work of Andrew Lloyd Webber, godfather 
of the spectacle-driven megamusical. Lloyd Webber's commercial star 
is, tellingly, on the wane, but his name obviously still has international 
marquee value. In the case of ``Wind,'' a bizarrely misbegotten fable 
of spiritual and sexual awakening in rural Louisiana, the audience 
members who didn't speak English were the luckiest people in attendance. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>