<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many investors give more thought to breakfast than to their money 
market funds, which they have used mainly as a place to park their 
cash between stock trades. But with the average money market fund 
now leading the performance race against stocks _ and these days, 
that lead seems to widen almost every week _ people are starting to 
take these funds more seriously. General-purpose money funds have 
been yielding around 5 percent, while the average domestic stock mutual 
fund was down 13.4 percent in the third quarter. Indeed, $94 billion 
poured into them in the third quarter, the largest quarterly inflow 
on record, according to IBC Financial Data of Ashland, Mass. Few investors, 
however, examine what their money-market funds own or try to determine 
whether the funds have made the best choices. A first consideration 
in picking a money market fund is its expenses, since the returns 
do not vary much. ``Investment brilliance doesn't show itself in a 
money market fund,'' said Gary Schatsky, a fee-only financial planner 
in New York. ``Therefore, I advise my clients to look for funds with 
the lowest expenses.'' Finding such funds can be more complicated 
than it sounds. To draw in cash, many funds temporarily waive their 
expenses, which can run as high as 1.86 percent of assets, or offer 
high teaser rates. These funds may be good deals for investors with 
short time horizons, though not necessarily for long-term investors. 
Then there are funds that have consistently low expenses but offer 
little convenience. The funds with the lowest expenses generally have 
high minimum investments _ often $20,000 or more _ and allow check-writing 
only for big dollar amounts, while perhaps charging high fees for 
each check. Such a fund has little appeal to the big group of investors 
who see their money market funds as high-yield checking accounts for 
big-ticket monthly expenses like mortgages and car payments. But it 
may have great appeal for another group: those who want to keep their 
money untouched for six months to a year or longer. Many companies 
now offer funds for both types of investors. Scudder Kemper Investments, 
for instance, started the Zurich Yieldwise Money fund in April 1997 
to attract savers. It requires a $25,000 minimum investment, allows 
an account holder to write checks of only $1,000 or more and charges 
$2 for every check. The fund, which ranked 12th among general purpose 
funds, had a seven-day yield of 5.29 percent through Sept. 29 and 
an expense ratio of 0.34 percent of assets. Zurich Yieldwise is meant 
for an investor ``who wants to maximize the return on the cash portion 
of their portfolio, but again isn't planning to spend the money anytime 
soon,'' said Michael Harrington, who runs the Zurich money funds for 
Scudder Kemper. By contrast, the Zurich Money fund has a minimum of 
only $1,000 and allows unlimited check-writing for amounts of $500 
or more. The fund, ranked 37th on the general purpose list, has an 
expense ratio of 0.48 percent and a seven-day yield of 5.13 percent 
through Sept. 29. Money market funds are a lot like mutual funds _ 
a pool of assets owned by many investors _ with an important difference. 
Each day, mutual funds must price the securities in their portfolio 
according to market price, which creates a fluctuating net asset value, 
while money funds have a constant net asset value of $1 a share. That 
means an investor's principal remains intact in a money fund despite 
market fluctuations. The Securities and Exchange Commission requires 
these funds to invest mostly in top-quality short-term securities. 
The securities must have maturities of 13 months or less, and the 
average maturity of the entire portfolio cannot be more than 90 days. 
The restrictions on credit quality protect investors from default, 
while the short-maturity rules protect investors from interest-rate 
risk, said Peter Crane, managing editor at IBC. Performance of money 
funds is described in terms of the current seven-day, or SEC, yield: 
the annualized return of the dividend payouts of the underlying securities 
for the previous seven days. The funds also report the ``effective 
seven-day yield,'' which calculates what the return would be if the 
dividends were reinvested. Investors should also consider longer-term 
statistics, like one-year or five-year total returns, which include 
any capital gains, Crane said. Investors should also decide whether 
they want a taxable fund or a tax-free fund, which may yield more 
than the taxable fund after taxes. Relatively high yields have added 
to the appeal of a different tax-free investment _ municipal bond 
funds. But the same is not true for tax-free money funds, which have 
an average yield of 3.23 percent, or more than one and a half percentage 
points below the 4.87 percent of general purpose funds. That makes 
tax-free funds beneficial only to investors in the top tax brackets. 
And some tax-free funds that are specifically aimed at investors in 
high-tax states like California or New York. There are two types of 
taxable funds: government funds and the higher-yielding general purpose 
funds. Government funds must buy mostly short-term Treasury securities 
and obligations of government agencies like the Federal Home Loan 
Mortgage Corp., while general purpose funds can invest in higher-yielding 
short-term debt, like certificates of deposit issued by banks or savings 
institutions and bankers' acceptances, which are short-term notes 
issued by commercial banks, according to IBC. Even fatter yields are 
found in corporate commercial paper. Investors in government funds 
tend to be more conservative. For that reason, Crane recommends funds 
that buy only Treasury securities. People who invest in general purpose 
funds are taking on slightly more risk for a little extra yield. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>