<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0514 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It began one morning 12 years ago, when Matthew, then 24, could barely 
crawl out of bed. He persevered at podiatry school in Chicago for 
six months while becoming increasingly nervous and agitated. Finally, 
he saw a psychiatrist. The diagnosis was chronic depression, and the 
doctor wrote a prescription for an antidepressant. Such medications 
_ Prozac, Zoloft and Paxil are the most widely used _ have truly been 
wonder drugs, becoming as much a staple of daily life as Big Macs 
or Tylenol as they have helped lift the gloom from the lives of many 
of the nearly 18 million Americans who the National Institute of Mental 
Health says are affected each year by depression. But they do not 
work for everyone. Matthew, who spoke on the condition that his last 
name not be used, is one of about 3.6 million depressed people who 
doctors say get no help from existing medications. After spending 
$15,000 of his own money on doctor fees and medication to learn only 
that lithium is white, Depakote orange and Prozac yellow and pale 
green, Matthew, now a medical technician in Ocean Township, N.J., 
wonders if he will ever find a cure. ``I'm not that optimistic that 
a company can develop a drug that can help me,'' he said, ``but I'm 
willing to wait and see.'' He may not have to wait long. Sometime 
in the next five years _ perhaps as soon as 2001 _ Eli Lilly &AMP; 
Co.'s patents on Prozac will expire, and Lilly and a half-dozen other 
giant pharmaceutical companies are spending hundreds of millions of 
dollars in the hope of developing the drug that supplants Prozac as 
the market leader. Sales of antidepressants, meanwhile, are expected 
to reach $8 billion in the United States at about the time Lilly loses 
its exclusive rights to Prozac. So, ``there clearly is a lot at stake 
here,'' said Bruce L. Downey, the chief executive of Barr Laboratories, 
a drug maker involved in a legal fight with Lilly over the right to 
produce a generic version of Prozac. Speaking of Barr's fight with 
Lilly _ but in a comment that could refer to the whole, bruising race 
_ he added, ``I can guarantee you that in this battle, no stone will 
be left unthrown.'' Still, it is not guaranteed that the Next Big 
Thing in antidepressants will be a boon for the industry _ or even 
much help for people like Matthew. Many industry analysts say they 
expect that any new brand-name best seller will be a drug that is 
no more effective than Prozac, but simply has fewer side effects. 
Moreover, the introduction of generic Prozac may lead cost-cutting 
managed health care companies to require doctors to prescribe it rather 
than the more expensive antidepressants under development. Either 
of those scenarios would fall short of the hopes of many doctors. 
To satisfy them, the ultimate antidepressant would work immediately 
in every patient, have no side effects and allow patients to follow 
simple dosage regimens. It could also be given to manic-depressives 
without causing a manic episode. ``People are used to taking Tylenol 
and feeling better shortly thereafter, not weeks later,'' said Dr. 
Steven E. Hyman, director of the National Institute of Mental Health. 
``If someone is suicidal, you may not have weeks.'' It is unclear 
which, if any, of the drugs under development will be Hyman's aspirin 
for depression. Some drug makers are taking entirely new approaches 
to combating depression; the entries from Novartis, Warner-Lambert 
and Pfizer are so young they have yet to be named. In any event, drugs 
from giant companies are akin to children of blue-blood families: 
they tend to succeed even when they are mediocre. The market is certainly 
enormous; this year, sales of antidepressants in the United States 
are expected to hit $6.3 billion, according to IMS Health, a health 
care consulting firm. Depression costs American businesses $23 billion 
a year in lost work time and productivity, according to the National 
Foundation for Depressive Illness, making it one of the nation's most 
expensive ailments. It is also one of the most painful. People who 
cannot be helped by medication are often forced to live with insomnia, 
fatigue and a pervasive feeling of despair. Lilly's corporate headquarters 
in Indianapolis is on the front lines of the antidepressant battle. 
Walk into just about any meeting room there, and one is likely to 
find executives scratching their heads over how to survive ``Year 
X'' _ when Prozac loses its patent protections. Exactly when that 
will happen is unclear, because the separate patents on the drug's 
chemical makeup and how it works with a chemical in the brain expire 
three years apart, beginning in 2001. Barr Laboratories has applied 
to the Food and Drug Administration to make a generic Prozac, and 
Lilly has sued, contending patent infringement. Such legal battles 
can last for years _ particularly when a product as valuable as Prozac 
is at stake. Seldom has one brand been so central to a company's success. 
This year, Prozac will contribute nearly 30 percent of Lilly's estimated 
$10 billion in worldwide sales, making it one of the best-selling 
drugs ever. To replace the revenue that will be lost once Prozac's 
patents expire, Lilly plans to introduce several new drugs, including 
two antidepressants and a compound that would relieve the complications 
of diabetes. ``We have plenty of strategies in place to prosper in 
Year X,'' said Sidney Taurel, Lilly's chief executive. ``The worst 
scenario that I'm expecting is for earnings gains to fall into the 
single digits during Year X and then climb back to double digits the 
year after.'' If the company falls short, however, investors may want 
a word with Taurel. Many analysts contend that the race to supplant 
Prozac should never have begun. Instead, they say, LIlly should have 
maintained its stranglehold by developing a replacement for Prozac 
sooner. ``Several pharmaceutical companies have had a problem replacing 
the drug that made them famous,'' said Neil Sweig, a pharmaceuticals 
analyst with Southeast Research Partners, a research firm. ``It's 
a hard thing to do. One thing in Lilly's favor, though, is that none 
of the antidepressants that have come out recently are better than 
Prozac. This is a fight that is just beginning.'' For Lilly shareholders, 
the big question is how soon Year X will arrive. Sweig forecasts that 
Lilly earnings will rise to $2.958 billion in 2000, up nearly 70 percent, 
excluding extraordinary charges, from last year's levels. If Prozac 
has no generic competition in 2001, he says, Lilly's earnings will 
increase 16 percent in 2001 and 15 percent more in 2002. But if generics 
are able to eat away 50 percent of Prozac's sales, Sweig says Lilly's 
earnings will be flat in 2001 before falling about 15 percent a year 
later. The introduction of Prozac in 1988 ushered in a new class of 
drugs that were much more effective and had fewer side effects than 
older antidepressants like Elavil and Tofranil. The new drugs, selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs, bolster serotonin, a brain 
chemical believed to be deficient in some depressed people. The drugs 
they largely displaced, a class called tricyclics, had operated by 
bolstering the levels of serotonin and norepinephrine in the brain 
but sometimes caused severe side effects. No one, including Lilly's 
top executives, could have predicted Prozac's effect on the world. 
In less than 10 years, it played a huge role in making depression 
a socially acceptable illness. In 1988, only 130.7 million prescriptions 
were written in the United States for psychotherapeutics, which include 
antidepressants and antipsychotic and anti-anxiety drugs. Prozac, 
or fluoxetine hydrochloride, had 1.45 million of the total, according 
to IMS Health. By last year, the category had expanded to 232.6 million 
prescriptions, with Prozac contributing 9.88 million. With that success, 
it appears, it was easy for Lilly to get complacent. ``It is a valid 
criticism that we have a gap in our pipeline,'' said Dr. August M. 
Watanabe, executive vice president for science and technology at Lilly. 
``But the reason we call Prozac's expiration Year X is because we 
are not certain when it is. And we may have plenty of time to develop 
new drugs.'' Lilly has several options to protect Prozac's market, 
but none are easy. Industry analysts have long expected the company 
to license a new version of Prozac from Sepracor Inc., a specialty 
pharmaceutical company in Marlborough, Mass., known for improving 
existing drugs largely by eliminating their side effects. Such a deal, 
analysts say, could secure Lilly's franchise, minimizing any potential 
loss of sales. Lilly's chief executive, Taurel, declined to discuss 
the likelihood of an agreement with Sepracor, and Sepracor officials 
also declined, perhaps because no alliance is in the offing. Last 
week, David P. Southwell, Sepracor's chief financial officer, said 
the company was pondering several options for its purified form of 
Prozac. Sepracor itself might market the drug, for example, or license 
it to one of Lilly's rivals, including Schering-Plough or Johnson 
&AMP; Johnson. ``We have 65 salespeople now,'' Southwell said. ``We 
didn't have any two months ago. When we looked at the revenue stream 
_ we try to get royalties from our products instead of taking cash 
up front _ we discovered we'd make more money selling it with this 
little sales force than if we licensed it to another company. But 
we are studying several possibilities.'' Another potential problem 
for Lilly is Barr's challenge on the Prozac patents. If Barr is successful, 
it will be allowed to sell a generic version of the drug exclusively 
for six months before other competitors can crowd in. Downey expects 
generic Prozac to take 75 percent of the brand's sales _ about $2.25 
billion _ in those first six months on the market. Taurel dismissed 
the notion that Lilly could lose Prozac's patents before 2003. But 
if he thought he might lose to Barr in court, he probably could afford 
to buy himself a little leeway. Because Barr is relatively tiny, with 
only $377 million in annual sales, analysts have long speculated that 
Lilly could settle the dispute, giving Barr a cash payment of $50 
million or so and the right to make generic Prozac sometime before 
2003, but not as soon as if Barr had prevailed in court. However, 
a settlement appears unlikely. Downey, who spent 25 years as a trial 
lawyer, said on Friday: ``My goal is to win and launch. If there is 
a settlement, that will be up to the other side.'' Taurel declined 
to comment on any of these possibilities. Any deal-making that sustains 
Prozac's hold on the marketplace could leave many psychiatrists dissatisfied. 
Although doctors generally agree that SSRIs are the best antidepressants 
yet, they have complaints about every drug in the category _ Prozac 
in particular. Paxil, by SmithKline Beecham; Zoloft, Pfizer's entry 
in the category, and Celexa, a new SSRI by Warner-Lambert and Forest 
Laboratories, can take as long as five weeks to take full effect. 
Prozac can, too _ but it takes as long as four weeks to wash out of 
a patient's bloodstream after use is discontinued, meaning that doctors 
must wait that long before prescribing another drug. Prozac can also 
cause anxiety at first use. Moreover, all four drugs, which together 
control about 96 percent of the American antidepressant market, can 
cause sexual dysfunction. Adding to that misery, SSRIs have no therapeutic 
effect in 20 percent of all cases and cannot be safely mixed with 
several other commonly used medications. Prozac ``has not always been 
effective with people on either end of the scale, the ones who are 
barely impaired and those who are very ill,'' said Dr. Donald Klein, 
director of research at the New York State Psychiatric Institute. 
``But Prozac is very effective with people in the middle.'' Few drug 
makers can afford to stumble in the race for a new best-selling antidepressant. 
Investors have come to expect quarterly earnings gains of 20 percent 
or higher from the big pharmaceutical companies, leaving little room 
to write off hundreds of millions of dollars in research and development 
costs for a drug that does not work. To avoid such losses, drug companies 
typically try to develop multiple uses for a single compound. The 
trailblazer is this regard was Glaxo Wellcome's antidepressant Wellbutrin, 
which last year also began sales as Zyban, a smoking-cessation medication. 
With Prozac coming off patent, Lilly has learned to play this game, 
too. One of its two new antidepressants is also under development 
as a treatment for incontinence, an ailment that appears to be medically 
unrelated. The drug, duloxetine, is expected to be released in 2001 
as an anti-incontinence pill and a year later as an antidepressant. 
Some Lilly rivals say that the plans for duloxetine are a sign of 
desperation _ that it is a lackluster antidepressant being trotted 
out to market only because the company lacked a more formidable replacement 
for Prozac. Lilly officials acknowledge that they took another look 
at duloxetine because of the approach of Year X, but they say the 
later, more accurate tests proved the drug a more effective antidepressant 
than had been originally believed. Lilly says it also hopes that duloxetine 
will take effect more quickly than Prozac. But it is unlikely to be 
as popular. Watanabe described duloxetine as similar to Effexor, the 
new antidepressant of American Home Products. Yet, Effexor has earned 
less than 4 percent of the national antidepressant market since its 
introduction in 1993. The problem, doctors say, is that when patients 
are satisfied with an antidepressant they often refuse to switch, 
even to something that is better. Lilly's other new antidepressant 
is a combination of Prozac and Zyprexa, its enormously successful 
antipsychotic drug. In a pilot study of 30 people who had been treated 
unsuccessfully with two antidepressants, one group received Prozac, 
another was given a placebo and a third group was given the Prozac-Zyprexa 
combination. The group receiving the combination had a sharply higher 
response, Lilly discovered, than those who had been given Prozac alone 
or a placebo. But the FDA gives closer scrutiny to any combination 
of drugs because of possible interactions, so combining Zyprexa with 
Prozac could invite regulatory delay. Two other drugs under development 
appear to offer more hope of being the kind of compound desired by 
both market analysts and doctors. Merck and Novartis are among the 
companies working on one of them, which would introduce a completely 
new class of antidepressant. Instead of raising levels of certain 
chemicals in the brain, as the SSRIs and other antidepressants do, 
this type of drug blocks receptors of a chemical, known as Substance 
P, that is believed to affect depression. Scientists discovered that 
by blocking the Substance P receptors, they might treat everything 
from migranes to anxiety. In the initial phases of trials on humans, 
Merck's drug has shown promising results. In a recent six-week study, 
213 people with moderate to severe depression were given the Substance 
P blocker, a placebo or Paxil. Merck's drug reduced depression as 
effectively as Paxil, without many of the side effects _ notably sexual 
dysfunction. ``It's a novel way of treating depression, but we are 
still in the early days of the program,'' said Dr. Scott Reines, vice 
president for clinical research at Merck. ``It's too early to tell 
if it will work with severely depressed people. And there's no way 
we can say when it will be coming out.'' The other contender appears 
to be Sepracor's new purified Prozac compound, even though some doctors 
are skeptical about its effectiveness. The drug has two enormous advantages: 
It will always be known as improved Prozac, regardless of which company 
sells it. And it has a better chance of approval by the FDA, given 
that the original version of Prozac has been safely administered to 
millions of patients in the last 10 years. ``Hopefully, it will be 
have a quicker wash-out and substantially less drug-to-drug interaction,'' 
Southwell, the Sepracor official, said. Still, the company that develops 
the next big antidepressant must be able to sell it. Sepracor's sales 
force of 65 is hardly competition for Lilly's troop of 2,400. Now 
that the FDA is permitting direct-to-consumer advertisements of prescription 
drugs, any major pharmaceutical company could drum up a market for 
a new antidepressant with a big advertising campaign. Sepracor lacks 
the deep pockets for that, but Johnson &AMP; Johnson and Schering-Plough, 
with which Sepracor may reach a licensing deal, are both shrewd television 
marketers. Schering used television ads to build a market for its 
Claritin antihistamine, which is expected to have $3 billion in sales 
this year, with 58 percent of the American antihistamine market. Johnson 
&AMP; Johnson is one of the best known and respected consumer brands 
in the world. Lilly, by contrast, with far less background in consumer 
marketing, ran its first television ads on depression two months ago. 
But Taurel says he is ready to take more risks and may advertise more 
ot its wares where appropriate, to prop up Lilly's sales. Doctors 
are watching the corporate dogfight with amusement. Lilly had no clue 
that Prozac would be such an enormous success, and the owner of the 
next giant antidepressant will probably not instantly grasp the full 
value of its test-tube contents, either. ``You may never know where 
the next antidepressant may come from,'' Hyman said. ``So don't be 
so leery of a drug that is an antidepressant now when it was originally 
created to treat something else. One of the first antidepressants, 
iproniazid, was originally invented to treat tuberculosis.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>