<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0503 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Police Department judge has ruled that a New York City police officer 
who admitted riding on a racist float during a Labor Day parade in 
Queens should be fired, according to the decision, which has not been 
made public. Police Commissioner Howard Safir, who would not confirm 
the details of the judge's ruling, said he would weigh the recommendation, 
officials said Friday. Safir previously stated that the officer, Joseph 
Locurto, should be dismissed for wearing blackface and an Afro wig 
in the parade. Noting that Locurto's participation was not disputed 
during the departmental trial, he added that ``racial, ethnic or gender 
discrimination is not something I am tolerant of, and somebody exercising 
their First Amendment right is different from whether they should 
stay in uniform.'' The float, called ``Black to the Future,'' appeared 
in a parade in the Broad Channel section of Queens and included the 
police officer, two city firefighters and others wearing blackface. 
Some revelers tossed watermelon and fried chicken to spectators and 
one man re-enacted the dragging death of a black man in Texas in June. 
Safir must decide whether to fire the officer before Monday if he 
wants to take action before Locurto, a four-year veteran, is automatically 
reinstated with pay after his monthlong suspension. But Safir said 
Friday that he would not rush his deliberations. ``I am operating 
under no deadline,'' he said. ``I am operating under how long it takes 
me to make a decision.'' He could still dismiss the officer after 
an automatic reinstatement. Locurto, 30, was suspended from his post 
at the 104th Precinct in Queens on Sept. 11. Two city firefighters 
who rode on the float have also been suspended and are awaiting a 
decision by Fire Commissioner Thomas Von Essen on their fate. It is 
expected next week. Revelations about the float in the Broad Channel 
parade came a day after a youth rally in Harlem ended with a disturbance 
between participants and police, and highlighted what some black leaders 
said was official disinterest in countering racism in the department. 
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Safir both quickly made public statements 
saying that such overt acts of bigotry would not be tolerated by city 
employees, and they promised to fire any city employee who participated. 
But if dismissed, Locurto would be the first police officer since 
1991 to face such a severe penalty for partaking in racially offensive 
speech or expression. And during Locurto's hearing before the deputy 
commissioner of trials, Rae Koshetz, his lawyers pointed out that 
during that time, there had been several administrative cases against 
officers who had not only directed ethnic slurs at suspects but had 
done so while also beating them. These officers were not fired. Instead, 
the presiding Police Department judge imposed a term of suspension 
or a forfeiture of a few vacation days, they said. Locurto's lawyers, 
who included Norman Siegel, the executive director of the New York 
Civil Liberties Union, also portrayed their client's actions as protected 
speech similar to that at a political rally. But in ruling against 
the officer, Judge Koshetz said that Locurto's case was different 
from others that had come before the court because it had been a public 
display of racism, noting in her opinion that no other cases had ``involved 
a degrading portrayal of African-Americans as a group and mocked a 
racist dragging death in a parade watched by up to a thousand people 
in a neighborhood'' where the defendant was known as a policeman. 
She added that she did not believe he had intended to make social 
commentary when he got up on the float in blackface and wearing an 
Afro wig. Instead, she said, the officer was merely trying to have 
a good time and possibly win a prize for the funniest float. ``I find 
that this float was designed to mimic and mock a racial group for 
the amusement of the participants and spectators,'' she wrote, calling 
his claim of public-spirited speech both disingenuous and self-serving. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>