<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. _ The space shuttle 
Discovery's engines shut down seconds before liftoff on Thursday, 
prompting Sen. John Glenn to scramble out of the cockpit and run for 
his life _ knowing all the while that it was just a drill. Glenn, 
who made history on Feb. 20, 1962, as the first American to orbit 
Earth, was aboard the shuttle with six crew members at least 31 years 
his junior for a dress rehearsal of the scheduled Oct. 29 launching 
that will mark his return to space. There was no fuel in the shuttle's 
rocket engines. ``Everything proceeded very smoothly,'' Lisa Malone, 
a spokeswoman for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 
said of the 25-hour practice session, which simulated an aborted liftoff 
at the Kennedy Space Center here. After 91 shuttle flights in 17 years, 
such countdown exercises typically do not attract much attention. 
But more than 100 journalists from around the world converged on the 
space center to witness the practice session. Responding to the heightened 
interest, NASA provided live television coverage and running commentary 
during the countdown. Glenn, 77 and a four-term Democratic senator 
from Ohio, used a question-and-answer session at the launching pad 
on Thursday to complain about news media reports that focus on him 
instead of on the scientific aspects of the planned nine-day mission. 
Glenn, who is retiring this year, will do geriatric research as the 
Discovery's rookie payload specialist. Asked to describe his preflight 
jitters almost 37 years ago and now, Glenn said: ``Back then, I was 
scared to death I might catch a cold or something and I might be replaced. 
I feel that same way right now.'' For Thursday's test, NASA cameras 
followed Glenn and the other astronauts every step of the way from 
their living quarters, where they donned pumpkin-colored pressure 
suits, to the top of the 195-foot launching tower, where they were 
strapped into their seats in the shuttle's crew module for about three 
hours. Cameras mounted in the cramped cockpit documented the action 
as the astronauts, one by one, crawled head first through the Discovery's 
circular hatch and climbed into seats that tilt them on their backs 
when the shuttle's nose is pointed skyward for liftoff. The crew, 
consisting of six men and one woman, moved through procedures they 
will perform on the day they are launched into space. Onboard computers 
halted the countdown five seconds before the moment of liftoff _ 1.6 
seconds past the ignition time for the Discovery's three hydrogen-fueled 
main engines. On cue, the astronauts then scrambled out of the crew 
module unassisted, as they would have to do in the event of a fire, 
explosion or serious fuel leak during the actual countdown. In a real 
emergency, they would jump into baskets and slide down a cable to 
the ground, where they could take refuge in a concrete bunker. To 
maintain proficiency, launch controllers rehearsed countdown procedures 
four times during the summer's shuttle flight hiatus, but without 
the crew. ``This is the test where we really start to put our heads 
down and concern ourselves with the task at hand,'' said Steve Altimus, 
the NASA test director. He attributed ``a buzz of excitement'' among 
the controllers to the publicity surrounding Glenn. ``We're all kind 
of excited about launching a national hero, a space pioneer,'' Altimus 
said. Once in Earth orbit, the crew will deploy and retrieve a Sun-studying 
satellite, test equipment destined for the Hubble Space Telescope, 
and conduct more than 80 scientific experiments in fields ranging 
from solar physics to internal medicine. Glenn will be the chief subject 
in a series of tests comparing the physiological effects of reduced 
gravity _ bone and muscle loss, balance disorders, a depressed immune 
system and sleep disturbances _ with the frailties of advanced age. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>