<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0423 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The last time Wendell Williamson drew national attention, it was one 
January day in 1995. He seemed to come out of nowhere, firing an M-1 
rifle on a busy street near the campus of the University of North 
Carolina, where he was a law student, and killing two men he had never 
met. The story of the Chapel Hill shootings made headlines for a few 
days. But at Williamson's trial, the jury found him not guilty by 
reason of insanity, accepting his lawyer's argument that he suffered 
from paranoid schizophrenia and had believed he was saving the world 
with his random killings. What happened next turned the case into 
one that has captured the attention of lawyers and mental health experts 
across the country. From his room in a state psychiatric ward, Williamson 
sued a psychiatrist who had seen him just half a dozen times, the 
last occasion eight months before the killings. Williamson contended 
that the doctor, Myron B. Liptzin, had not made a correct diagnosis, 
had not explained how seriously ill Williamson was and had not followed 
up after their sessions ended. Last month Williamson won a jury verdict 
of $500,000 that has provoked a furor in North Carolina and beyond. 
Although violent criminals have won malpractice cases against their 
therapists before, critics of this verdict say its size and Williamson's 
notoriety send a destructive message: that the legal system is willing 
to let people hold someone else accountable for their actions. ``This 
is part of the attempt to shift responsibility in our society,'' said 
Bruce Berger, a Raleigh lawyer who represents Liptzin. ``Nobody's 
responsible for their own actions anymore. It's always somebody else's 
fault.'' Newspapers across the state have called the verdict ``another 
tragedy'' that ``bodes ill for society.'' Psychiatrists here and around 
the country say the verdict may discourage therapists from treating 
psychotic patients. Liptzin himself says that the facts do not support 
the verdict and that he will appeal. Supporters of the verdict, including 
lawyers' groups and advocates for the mentally ill, say it stands 
for nothing more than that two categories of people are entitled to 
appropriate care of the psychologically disturbed: the disturbed people 
themselves and the people they might injure. In an interview this 
week at the state hospital where, under the verdict in the criminal 
case, he is required to live in a locked psychiatric ward until he 
can prove he is no longer a danger, Williamson, now 30, said the verdict 
in the civil case showed that he and the people he killed were all 
victims of Liptzin's failure. ``The murders would not have happened 
if Dr. Liptzin had done his job properly,'' Williamson said. Williamson 
testified at the trial of his suit last month, telling the jurors 
that Liptzin ``had more control over the situation than I did.'' Liptzin, 
who also testified, said in an interview that the verdict ``makes 
no sense.'' Part of the rationale for his appeal, he said, is that 
the verdict seems to establish a rule that psychiatrists should police 
their patients. ``The person is ultimately responsible for himself,'' 
Liptzin said. ``How can I be responsible for something that is not 
predictable?'' Liptzin acknowledges that he did not find Williamson 
to be a paranoid schizophrenic. But his reports show that he did diagnose 
psychosis with ``delusional disorder grandiose.'' Liptzin says the 
treatments for the two conditions would be identical, while Williamson's 
lawyers say Liptzin's diagnosis significantly understated the patient's 
problems. At trial, held in Orange County Superior Court in Hillsborough, 
expert witnesses hired by Williamson's lawyer told the jurors that 
Liptzin had not given Williamson the care other psychiatrists typically 
provide. Liptzin's experts said he had done all that any reasonable 
psychiatrist could. In an interview, four of the jurors said the panel 
had been most troubled by the fact that Liptzin had not appeared to 
stress to Williamson how ill he was and had not given him a specific 
referral to another psychiatrist at the end of their six sessions. 
(Liptzin, now 64, was then about to retire.) Williamson says Liptzin 
was ``wishy washy'' about how sick he was. Liptzin said that, if he 
was gentle in his talks with Williamson, it was because he had learned 
that such highly intelligent but disturbed patients respond better 
to invitations to cooperate in their treatment than to orders from 
psychiatrists. ``Dr. Liptzin was treating Williamson as if he had 
a cold,'' not a serious mental illness, said Gordon Poer, one of the 
jurors. But Liptzin said Williamson clearly understood the severity 
of his condition. No doctor, he said, could be expected to continually 
monitor a patient who seemed to be progressing to guarantee that he 
did not launch a psychotic assault eight months later. Liptzin and 
Williamson were first brought together in 1994, when a dean at the 
law school persuaded Williamson to go to the student health service. 
Williamson had disrupted a class by insisting that he had telepathic 
powers. Liptzin was then director of psychiatric services for the 
university's student health services. Liptzin soon learned Williamson 
had been suffering psychological problems for several years. Williamson, 
a slender young man with a stylish bush of curly brown hair, had been 
an Eagle Scout, swim team captain and student body president in high 
school. He had graduated with honors from the university here. But 
by the time they met, the young man talked incessantly about being 
``the world's first telepath.'' He described how other people could 
inflict excruciating pain on his shoulder with their thoughts. Two 
years earlier, the doctor learned, Williamson had been involuntarily 
committed to a psychiatric ward for a time after campus police picked 
him up for screaming at students in a busy campus gathering place. 
He hit himself in the face until he cried. He told doctors then that 
a voice from ``the thing'' tormented him with grotesque images. A 
judge in 1992 had released him after the short hospitalization because 
there was no evidence he was a danger to anyone. Doctors had noted 
in their records, though, that Williamson kept a gun in his apartment. 
Lawyers in the civil case agreed that Williamson improved while seeing 
Liptzin. The patient began taking anti-psychotic medication and was 
able to finish the semester. By then, the gun was back at his family's 
home in the western North Carolina mountains. Exactly what happened 
when Williamson and Liptzin parted after the six visits is a matter 
of dispute. Liptzin testified that Williamson understood he was seriously 
ill and would have to seek out a different psychiatrist if he needed 
to continue his treatment because Liptzin was retiring that summer. 
Liptzin acknowledged he did not give Williamson a specific referral 
to another doctor. Williamson said he had not understood he was seriously 
ill. Liptzin gave him the impression that he could experiment with 
going off his medication if he told someone like his mother that he 
was doing so. He stopped taking the medication. ``He seemed OK,'' 
his mother, Fonda Williamson, said as she waited outside Broughton 
State Hospital in Morganton, N.C. for a visit with her heavily medicated 
son this week. ``The parents aren't in control of a grown man with 
a delusional mental illness,'' Mrs. Williamson said. ``All we had 
to go on was what he told us.'' Neither Liptzin, nor anyone else, 
she said, ever told her or her husband the details of his problems. 
She said the first time she ever heard the term ``paranoid schizophrenic'' 
was after the killings. After the summer at home in 1994, Williamson 
returned to Chapel Hill that fall. His psychological deterioration 
resumed. That January, he made his careful plans and walked down Chapel 
Hill's Henderson Street with the rifle he had brought back to school 
and hundreds of rounds of ammunition. After the verdict on Sept. 21, 
state officials have said they will make legal claims to have the 
state take much of any award Williamson might one day receive from 
Liptzin's insurance company. The officials say the state is entitled 
to be compensated for the costs of Williamson's hospitalization. Everyone 
agrees that Liptzin, 64, had no way of knowing on that January Thursday 
that his former patient had carefully gathered hundreds of rounds 
of ammunition and prepared a backpack with such items as rope and 
condoms to deal with any hostages he might end up with that afternoon. 
Still, the families of Williamson's victims say his $500,000 victory 
is a fresh assault. Carol Reichardt's son Kevin, was 20 that January 
afternoon when he was bicycling down Henderson Street on his way to 
a college class. Williamson blew him off the bicycle with a shot powerful 
enough to pass through a truck and then pursued him with the rifle 
at close range as he tried to crawl to safety. Mrs. Reichardt said 
she believed Liptzin and many other people at the university could 
have intervened as Williamson's psychological problems became obvious. 
If they had, she said, she is sure her son would be alive today. The 
other victim was Ralph W. Walker Jr., 42, a restaurant worker who 
was killed when he opened his front door to leave for work. Instead, 
she said, her family feels it has twice been denied justice while 
Williamson had been rewarded. ``He knows,'' she said, ``how to work 
the system.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>