<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0484 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times will say in an editorial on Saturday, Oct. 10: 
The move by several big health maintenance organizations to end their 
Medicare coverage in counties where they are losing money should come 
as no surprise. In their headlong rush to capture part of the huge 
Medicare market of 38 million Americans, many HMOs have made inaccurate 
financial projections and now realize they cannot provide comprehensive 
care at the cost they expected. Some 400,000 Medicare beneficiaries 
whose insurers are therefore cutting them loose will now have to find 
another HMO or go into the traditional fee-for-service Medicare program. 
Managed care has now become a fact of life for more than 80 percent 
of Americans covered by private insurance. But it is still quite new 
in the government-funded Medicare world where only 17 percent of beneficiaries 
are enrolled in HMOs and the rest are still in fee-for-service Medicare. 
Industry shake-outs will probably continue as more of the Medicare 
population moves into managed care. The prevailing theory among government 
policy makers is that encouraging Medicare patients to enroll in managed-care 
plans will save money in the long run. The 1997 Balanced Budget Act 
greatly expanded the kinds of plans that could seek to enroll Medicare 
beneficiaries in hopes that competition among private insurers would 
attract more people into managed care. That shift is happening rapidly. 
Virtually all the HMOs offer prescription drug benefits that traditional 
Medicare does not cover. Most also charge enrollees much lower deductibles 
and co-insurance costs than traditional Medicare does. These features 
have been effective in drawing in the elderly, but they are also expensive. 
Federal payments to HMOs do not take into account these new benefits. 
Instead, the plans are paid a per-enrollee rate that differs from 
county to county, based on past Medicare spending in each geographic 
area. In counties where payment rates are high, HMOs have made hefty 
profits. Where rates are lower, HMOs have a harder time. The decision 
by Oxford Health Plans, United Healthcare Corp. and Aetna U.S. Healthcare, 
among others, to pull out of some less profitable counties reflects 
that business reality. Yet in the vast majority of counties where 
some plans are leaving, other HMOs are staying and still others are 
seeking entrance. Only about 10 percent of the Medicare beneficiaries 
dropped by an HMO will be left with no managed-care option, an indication 
that payment rates in most counties are sufficient. President Clinton 
has urged expedited handling of applications by health plans to enter 
counties without HMO options. Federal law already gives people dropped 
from a Medicare HMO the right to buy private insurance to fill gaps 
in traditional Medicare without regard to their health condition. 
Clinton is also directing the Department of Health and Human Services 
to come up with legislation to prevent this kind of insurance turmoil 
in the future. That will be difficult. Medicare enrollees want added 
benefits like drug coverage, but some health plans say they cannot 
offer those benefits without higher payments from the government or 
the enrollees themselves. For the time being, there is apparently 
enough slack in the system to pay for the added benefits without substantially 
raising government payments. The question is how long that slack will 
last, even under managed care. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>