<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Legislation to give patients more power in dealing with health insurance 
companies died Friday, a casualty of heavy lobbying by the insurance 
industry and of the sex scandal that has enveloped President Clinton. 
Supporters and opponents said similar legislation would be back in 
1999. But this year's struggle shows once again how difficult it is 
to pass health care legislation affecting doctors, patients, lawyers, 
insurers and employers of all sizes. Since the demise of Clinton's 
plan for universal health insurance in 1994, he and his allies in 
Congress have tried to achieve the same goal step by step. But even 
these proposals have set off fierce fights about the proper role of 
government in regulating one of the nation's biggest industries. By 
a vote of 50-47 Friday in the waning hours of the 105th Congress, 
the Senate rejected a Democratic move to take up a bill to define 
patients' rights and to regulate health maintenance organizations. 
Congress' rush to adjournment hit a big bump Friday when Clinton demanded 
money for education initiatives that he proposed early this year. 
Senior lawmakers said they would work through the weekend and negotiate 
with the White House as they try to complete work on bills to finance 
the operations of the federal government in the fiscal year that began 
Oct. 1. Democrats said the bill defining patients' rights was needed 
to protect millions of Americans who have had problems with HMOs. 
They asserted that conservative Republican senators like Trent Lott 
of Mississippi and Don Nickles of Oklahoma never really wanted a bill, 
and worked with insurers to sidetrack legislation. Senate Republicans, 
who introduced their own bill to define patients' rights in July, 
said Friday that Democrats had passed up many opportunities for compromise 
because the Democrats wanted an election issue more than they wanted 
a new law. Democratic candidates are, in fact, campaigning on the 
issue. But some Republican candidates are also promising to pass legislation 
helping HMO patients. Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., said, ``Big 
money and powerful special interests kept us from debating this issue 
in the United States Senate.'' Sen. Tom Daschle, D-S.D., the minority 
leader, said, ``Passage of real patient protections should have been 
the highest priority of this session of Congress,'' but Republicans 
``thwarted us at every turn.'' The Senate Republican bill was narrower 
in scope than the Democratic bill. The Democrats said their legislation 
would have covered three times as many people as the Republican measure. 
In an interview, Nickles, the assistant majority leader, said, ``The 
Democrats trashed our proposal and never tried to work with us to 
come up with common elements that could become law.'' Lott, the Senate 
majority leader, acknowledged that HMO patients had ``some legitimate 
concerns and problems,'' and he added, ``I do believe that we are 
going to address this next year.'' The House passed a bill to define 
patients' rights and regulate HMOs in July. But in the Senate, Democrats 
and Republicans had such profound disagreements that they could not 
even get such legislation to the floor for debate. The measures considered 
this year, known as the Patient Protection Act and the Patients' Bill 
of Rights Act, would have guaranteed access to emergency care and 
medical specialists and would have permitted patients to appeal the 
denial of care to an independent panel of medical experts. The Democratic 
bills would also have made it easier for patients to sue HMOs and 
recover damages for the improper denial of care. If Congress sets 
uniform national standards for health insurance, that would be a major 
departure from the practice of the last half-century. Such insurance 
is regulated mainly by the states. Standards vary widely, and federal 
law severely limits the states' ability to regulate employee health 
benefits. On Capitol Hill, the outlines of a potential compromise 
were discernible in May. But Democrats were reluctant to compromise. 
After months of haggling over procedural questions, Senate Republicans 
eventually concluded that they did not have to deal with the issue 
this year. Consumer pleas for congressional action were ultimately 
drowned out in the debate over the possible impeachment of Clinton, 
and he had no political leverage to force Congress to act. A coalition 
of HMOs, insurance companies and employers _ the Health Benefits Coalition 
_ vehemently opposed new federal mandates on health plans, saying 
such requirements would increase costs and reduce the number of people 
with coverage. The coalition began its lobbying and advertising campaign 
on Jan. 21, the day of the first news reports about the president's 
affair with Monica Lewinsky. Clinton gave many speeches about HMO 
legislation, but his fight for the legislation suffered as he devoted 
more and more of his energy to fighting for the survival of his presidency. 
The Senate's summer recess, from July 31 to Aug. 31, was a turning 
point. ``August was not about health care,'' said Suzanne DeFrancis, 
vice president of Porter Novelli, an advertising and public relations 
company that worked with the Health Benefits Coalition. ``August was 
about Lewinsky.'' Clinton admitted his affair with Ms. Lewinsky in 
a televised speech on Aug. 17. Kennedy, who led the fight for a bill 
to give patients more power in dealing with health insurers, said, 
``To the extent that the public was focused on the whole White House 
problem, it may have emboldened the Republicans to shut us out of 
debate on HMO legislation.'' Dan Danner, chairman of the Health Benefits 
Coalition, who is also vice president of the National Federation of 
Independent Business, said the coalition had spent ``a little over 
$2 million'' on lobbying and advertising against HMO bills. In addition, 
he said, ``our member organizations have probably spent another $1 
million on advertising, and that does not include the cost of staff 
work and time spent on fax, phone calls, direct mail and tens of thousands 
of action alerts.'' Danner said the money was well spent. ``It's a 
good investment for the next Congress,'' he said. ``This issue will 
definitely be back, for two reasons. The number of uninsured people 
continues to go up. And after several years of relatively flat premiums, 
we now expect more significant increases in the cost of health care.'' 
Republicans are expected to pick up seats in the House and the Senate 
next month, so there may be more hostility to government regulation 
in the next Congress. On the other hand, the whole issue of regulating 
HMOs may be swept up in presidential politics if one or more candidates 
stress the issue. Johanna Schneider, a spokeswoman for the Business 
Roundtable, which represents 200 large companies, said the group had 
spent $1 million on its own radio and newspaper advertisements against 
HMO legislation. The coalition and the Business Roundtable ran advertising 
in 23 states, she added. Two House Republicans, Charlie Norwood of 
Georgia and Greg Ganske of Iowa, continually prodded their party leaders 
to pass a bill defining patients' rights. In an interview this week, 
Norwood said: ``I am very disappointed that the Senate has not moved 
a bill. Senators did not act because they didn't have to. Their mind 
is on Clinton's problems. You can't carry on a conversation up here 
for more than one minute before impeachment comes up. The Senate put 
off the health care issue, but it's not going away. I will butt my 
head against this wall until we get it done.'' Lisa Rickard, senior 
vice president of Ryder System Inc., the transportation service company, 
who coordinated the lobbying for the Business Roundtable, said: ``This 
year started out with tremendous momentum for a patients' bill of 
rights. There is a strong probability that legislation would have 
passed in the absence of our efforts to educate Congress and the public 
about the costs of such mandates.'' Peggy Taylor, chief lobbyist at 
the AFL-CIO, said: ``Senate Republicans got away with an amazing tactic. 
They pulled legislation from the floor whenever it appeared that Democrats 
would offer patient protections as an amendment, and the Republicans 
were afraid to bring up their own sham bill.'' Congressional candidates 
say frustration with HMOs still seems to be running high outside Washington. 
A survey by the National Journal found that campaign advertisements 
mentioning health insurance far outnumbered those referring to the 
Clinton scandal. ``We need to put patients and doctors back in charge 
of medical decisions, not managed care bureaucrats,'' Gail Riecken, 
the Democratic candidate in Indiana's 8th Congressional District, 
says in one commercial. In another, Shelley Berkley of Las Vegas tells 
voters, ``I believe all of us should have the right to choose our 
own doctor, see a specialist when we need one and know that medical 
decisions are being made by doctors and patients, not accountants 
and clerks.'' Rep. Loretta Sanchez, D-Calif., who is running for re-election, 
promises legislation to ``hold HMOs 100 percent accountable for improper 
care.'' Mary Crawford, a spokeswoman for the National Republican Congressional 
Committee, said: ``Health care is not a Democrat issue any more. We 
are not afraid of it.'' She noted that some Republican candidates 
for the House, like Ernest Fletcher in Kentucky, were promising to 
fight for HMO legislation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>