<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0383 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kabul's largest children's hospital, like Afghanistan itself, is a 
study in want. The X-ray machines have no film. The burn unit has 
been shut for lack of gauze and ointments. When a child needs a shot, 
parents are sent to the bazaar to buy the medication and a syringe. 
No records are kept of the 500 youngsters treated each day as out-patients, 
for this requires stationery, and there is a shortage of paper and 
pens. In the neonatal unit, a baby born two months prematurely was 
fighting for his life last week in a faulty 32-year-old incubator 
with a cracked glass casing. A few rooms away were four new machines 
ready to be uncrated, but no one knew how to use them. The day after 
the equipment arrived, the relief agency that bought them was expelled 
by the army of the Taliban, the Islamic movement in power here. With 
it went the workers who knew how to operate the incubators. Nearly 
three months have passed since 23 international aid groups left this 
country rather than obey a command to move their non-Afghan employees 
into a decrepit and abandoned row of college dormitories at the capital's 
edge. The Taliban have since expanded their military control to 90 
percent of the country and hardened the hold of their puritanical 
brand of Islam on the people. But even some Afghans who are most critical 
of the Taliban's austere rule say that the aid groups should have 
been more flexible and that the world overlooks the good the Taliban 
have done in bringing peace and social order. THE POVERTY: MONEY FOR 
THE SICK IS SPENT ON GUNS With winter approaching and hunger already 
here, it is hard to tell if Kabul is at the cliff's edge of a catastrophe 
or merely in the throes of severe hardship, something to which residents 
are sadly accustomed. The international agencies had been supplying 
clean water and fresh bread and medical necessities _ services that 
benefited 400,000 people, a third of the city's population. There 
is no one to take their place. The Taliban are preoccupied by war, 
and that is where their money goes. Government employees have not 
been paid in two months. Beggars are everywhere. Old men and young 
children station themselves inside potholes, serving as human markers 
for dangerous ruts in the roads, hoping grateful drivers will toss 
them a tip. ``We have been surveying the hospitals and their shelves 
are empty,'' said Christophe Luedi of the Red Cross, one of the few 
relief groups still working here. ``It is hard to measure the impact 
of this on the population because many people have simply stopped 
going to see the doctors. What is the use? Many are being told to 
just go away.'' The Ministry of Public Health is in a war-ravaged 
building. The metal frame of the facade remains but the glass is long 
gone, and visitors can enter through empty spaces where there once 
were doors, windows and walls. There, Mullah Mohammed Abbas, the health 
minister, insisted that Kabul is undergoing only ``minor nutritional 
problems,'' but he suggested a tour of local hospitals and clinics 
knowing full well what there was to discover. At the Indira Gandhi 
Child Health Institute and Hospital, bony boys and girls rested on 
cots in a nutrition ward that was depleted of even milk and vitamin-enriched 
biscuits. ``Obviously, we have great needs,'' said Dr. Mohammed Hussein, 
the deputy director. ``We have been left alone and we are now in God's 
hands.'' THE AID GROUPS: A CULTURAL CLASH AND STUBBORNNESS The departure 
of the aid groups _ known colloquially as NGOs, or nongovernmental 
organizations _ is a matter of great finger-pointing, with the Taliban 
and the agencies reproaching each other for what each side sees as 
the other's unreasonableness. Western charities, with their Western 
ways and Western expectations, were never a comfortable fit with the 
Taliban. At times the mullahs, the Islamic teachers, demanded that 
women at the agencies stop working in any place where they might be 
seen by a man who was not a blood relative. Strict laws of purdah 
_ the protective seclusion of women _ were to be maintained. But the 
aid groups were sometimes mulish as well, according to local officials 
from the United Nations and the Red Cross who exchanged their candor 
for confidentiality. ``The Taliban are neither skilled bureaucrats 
or intellectuals, and the NGOs were unwilling to accept their authority,'' 
one of these officials said. ``The Taliban have this village mentality. 
They're used to having their leaders respected. They were offended 
to have their religious beliefs questioned by people who assumed some 
kind of moral superiority.'' Suspicions steadily built. The Taliban 
wanted an accounting of how aid money was being spent. They also did 
not want Afghans to work for the agencies without a government ID 
card, a proposal the agencies took to be a means for interfering in 
hiring decisions. Then, in what became the last straw, the mullahs 
told the NGOs to move their staffs into the dilapidated dormitories, 
which had no water or electricity. The Taliban said a central location 
would make aid workers easier to protect, but they also admitted a 
desire to restrict the movements of foreigners. ``The issue for the 
Taliban was control, and we couldn't give in to that,'' said Liz Spencer, 
a spokeswoman for the Agency Coordinating Body for Afghan Relief. 
``And what about the donors? Who would give us $1 million, especially 
to repair college dormitories, especially given the Taliban's views 
on education for women? ``To be honest, though, I don't think anybody 
really thought the Taliban were serious about closing us down. They 
gave us a deadline, but we thought we'd be allowed to continue. Then 
_ surprise, surprise _ they came and sealed the offices.'' Now, shorn 
of purpose, a few groups are negotiating for a return. ``There's work 
to be done and no way to do it from outside the country,'' said one 
NGO official who regretted leaving and has since come back. ``Besides, 
when there are important human rights issues _ as there clearly are 
here _ it's more important to retain a presence and build a rapport 
with people. Over time, we can work away at the gender and other issues.'' 
THE TALIBAN: LOSS OF FREEDOM IS PRICE OF SECURITY The Taliban and 
the international community have so far failed to get along. Though 
the movement now controls most of the country, only three nations 
_ Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates _ have recognized 
the Taliban as a rightful government. Human rights violations are 
cited as the cause for keeping a distance. The Taliban's Muslim clerics 
_ rooted in village life that has changed little in 1,000 years _ 
have imposed an interpretation of Islamic law that punishes adulterers 
and homosexuals with death by stoning. Thieves have their hands cut 
off on Friday afternoons, an event customarily announced the night 
before so thousands can witness severe justice in a soccer stadium. 
Women and girls have been barred from work and school, their aspirations 
secreted away like messages in bottles. In the few circumstances when 
women are allowed out of doors, they must wear burkas, a head-to-toe 
garment with only a mesh of material at eye level to peer through. 
In villages, where three-quarters of Afghanistan's 15 million to 20 
million people live, the Taliban's religious dictates have brought 
little change. Few girls have ever gone to school; women covered their 
faces even as they worked in the fields. But in cities like Kabul 
and Herat, Western and secular ideas had taken hold, and the new restraints 
are stifling. In private conversations, complaints against the Taliban 
easily spill out, though they are often accompanied by varying sums 
of admiration. ``Before the Taliban, this country belonged to warlords, 
and the simple act of going to visit my village was an impossibility,'' 
said a U.N. official who is Afghan. ``My daughters sit in the house 
and cry to me: We want education. This is a heartbreak, but peace 
is the first priority for people here. The Taliban must be given credit 
for accomplishing this.'' Afghanistan, so often at the crossroads 
of history, has suffered 20 years of combat, including an occupation 
by the Soviet army and then a civil war among the Muslim holy warriors 
who threw them out. Kabul itself is hopelessly scarred, its water 
and sanitation systems in ruin. Buildings are freckled with bullet 
holes _ or entirely torn open by rockets. Spent artillery shells are 
sometimes used as highway dividers. Hundreds of thousands have fled. 
After a remarkable string of victories, the Taliban marched into Kabul 
two years ago. Their movement had been born in Islamic schools favored 
by refugees and the poor. Strict Islamic codes, applied with the confidence 
of absolute truth, were seen as a way to cleanse a wayward country. 
Worldly Kabul was a special target for Taliban reformation. In the 
process, the violence that had come with anarchy was replaced with 
a less capricious brutishness dictated by religion _ a tradeoff many 
were ready to accept. The Taliban were harsh occupiers, but they were 
not brigands. They did not loot and rape. THE KORAN: WHAT DOES ALLAH 
THINK OF ELVIS? Taliban leaders argue that the world has been so busy 
condemning their social beliefs that their restoration of social order 
has been slighted. Al-Haj Maulavi Qalamuddin, the religion minister, 
is tired of hearing about the oppression of women. ``To a country 
on fire, the world wants to give a match,'' he said, his thumb at 
work on a strand of brown prayer beads. ``Why is there such concern 
about women? Bread costs too much. There is no work. Even boys are 
not going to school. And yet all I hear about are women. Where was 
the world when men here were violating any woman they wanted?'' It 
is Qalamuddin, acting in his capacity as head of the General Department 
for the Preservation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, who enforces 
religious laws. Cruising the streets in pickup trucks, his men fly 
a white flag of purity while also carrying Kalashnikov rifles and 
shoulder-fired, rocket-propelled grenades. A measure of the effectiveness 
of these moral vigilantes is the declining need for them. At the risk 
of a severe thrashing, few women would any longer chance being seen 
without a burka. Men shy away from forbidden fun, like flying kites 
or playing cards. Still, new dictates are always being announced, 
the latest one forbidding male tailors to take a woman's measurements. 
Two months ago, the mandatory growing of beards began to be more stringently 
enforced. Some men, though dutifully sprouting whiskers, had kept 
them trimmed. The Prophet Mohammed never tidied his beard, the Taliban 
explain. Violators are locked up for 10 days of religious instruction. 
Televisions, too, are being eliminated. Stores cannot sell them; people 
cannot play them. For a while, the Taliban were going door to door 
to confiscate TVs, but this practice was stopped a few weeks ago when 
it was discovered that Taliban pretenders had been doing the same 
thing as an easy way to obtain an expensive appliance. Surreptitious 
video-watching inevitably goes on. ``We realize that television can 
be used to propagate good, but negative television is more popular,'' 
said Qalamuddin, a powerful-looking man with the shape of a kettle 
stove. ``Only one in 100 cassettes we confiscate are good. The rest 
are Indian movies and outright pornography, and these are polluters 
of the mind.'' Music is banned as hedonistic, though tape players 
are still available, their use intended only for approved recordings. 
Something that might be called Taliban rap _ prayerful chants without 
instrumentation _ is deemed acceptable. A typical lyric is: ``Do not 
kill the flowers of the mosque. Do not kill the words of the Koran. 
Do not kill the Taliban.'' Music appreciation is not an offense that 
leads to jail. Contraband cassettes are merely confiscated, the unspooled 
tape then hung from trees and telephone wires. Perhaps this is why 
people continue to take the risk. Hamid Gul, 18, said he plays his 
Elvis Presley recordings, careful to keep the volume low. Hamayun 
Ahmed, a driver, replaces his cassette of Pushtun pop with Taliban 
rap each time he approaches a checkpoint or toll booth. ``The Taliban 
are too religious for me, but they have stopped the thefts and the 
killings,'' Ahmed said. ``Maybe someday they will also figure out 
how to supply some food.'' Shelter, food, even schools for girls: 
these things will all come in time, promised Maulavi Saeed Ahmad, 
the deputy minister of education. ``We have suspended, not ended, 
school for girls,'' he said. ``The Koran is the same for males and 
females, though one must understand that there are certain injunctions 
when it comes to women.'' School curriculums, whether for boys or 
girls, are matters that must wait for all fighting to stop. ``We are 
in a state of war now, but when this is over, all the mullahs will 
meet night and day and formulate these policies,'' said Maulavi Ahmad, 
who occupies an important post for someone only 28. ``In the meantime, 
the world must be patient with us. We are not fanatics. We are people 
of principle, not fanaticism.'' As an example, he described himself 
as a man of everyday concerns, the father of a 4-year-old boy. ``And 
I pray to God that he grants me 20 more sons,'' he said hopefully. 
``That is my wish from Allah, that I am given this many sons and may 
they all die as martyrs.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>