<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The yen's sudden jump against the dollar this past week threatens 
to take the momentum out of Japan's exports by making it more costly 
for America and other foreign markets to buy Japanese products. If 
the yen's new-found strength lasts, economists say, it could even 
prolong Japan's worst postwar recession. Big corporate exporters like 
Sony Corp., Honda Motor Co., Fuji Photo Film Co. and NEC Corp. have 
been caught off-guard by the yen's abrupt about-face. The yen's higher 
exchange value makes their products more expensive abroad and lowers 
the value of their foreign earnings when converted back into yen. 
``If the high yen trend continues, we will see the influence on our 
sales and profits within several months,'' Tamotsu Iba, vice president 
of Sony, said in a statement. ``The current rapid rise in the yen 
does not reflect the fundamentals of the Japanese economy.'' Up until 
this week, the yen had been weakening for months, a reflection of 
the litany of economic problems confronting Japan: debt-laden banks, 
rising bankruptcies, falling domestic sales, plummeting business confidence 
and a stock market that has continued to flirt with 12-year lows. 
Asia's economic crisis put further downward pressure on the yen. But 
the yen's weakness has also been regarded as a benefit to Japan because 
it has helped stimulate exports, the one area of Japan's economy that 
has continued to maintain relative health. Now, the abrupt change 
to a stronger yen, combined with signs of economic weakness appearing 
in Japan's most important market, the United States, has raised doubts 
about Japanese exporters as well. Share prices of companies heavily 
dependent on exports have been falling recently. Many of those companies 
are the bluest of Japan's blue chips, the industrial elite of the 
nation. Honda shares, for example, fell 470 yen Friday, to close at 
2,900 yen, while Sony's shares declined 380, to 7,770 yen. Honda is 
now trading at about 9 times earnings, while Sony trades at 16 times 
earnings. In comparison, shares of the Matsushita Electric Industrial 
Co., which is less dependent on exports to the United States than 
Honda and Sony, trade at 27 times earnings. ``It's hard to say in 
any definitive way what the exact impact could be without knowing 
each companies' hedging ratios, the final demand for their products 
and where they are produced,'' said Kathy Matsui, chief strategist 
at Goldman, Sachs (Japan) Ltd. ``But I still think that, net-net, 
it's hard to say it's positive for the exporters.'' Some companies 
did offer rudimentary snapshots of the potential impact of the yen's 
swing. A one yen move in the dollar-yen exchange rate makes a 5 billion-yen 
difference in Sony's profits. Thus, the recent seesaw of the rate 
from 135.35 yen to the dollar when trading opened this week to 116.95 
yen in late New York trading Friday caused a slide of more than $780 
million in potential earnings from Sony's operating profits. The Toyota 
Motor Corp., Japan's largest car company, sees a 10 billion yen swing 
in operating profits every time the dollar-yen exchange rate fluctuates 
by one yen. The yen's rise is not necessarily viewed as a bad development 
elsewhere in Asia _ in fact, other weakened Asian economies could 
benefit from a rising yen because it would make their exports more 
competitive. Stock markets in Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and 
Thailand rose Friday because of that prospect. But Japan has been 
counting on its mighty car and electronics manufacturers with their 
vast global sales networks to generate the cash needed to keep its 
gross domestic product from slumping further than the 1.8 percent 
decline the government has projected. With much of Asia still stuck 
in an economic rut and the domestic market in a funk, the Japanese 
exporters are regarded as increasingly important to Japan's still 
elusive recovery. If the U.S. economy slows further, as many believe 
it will, and the yen maintains its current strength, corporate Japan 
will face an unprecedented jump in excess capacity and inventories, 
which are already at levels that are pressuring prices. While the 
long-term impact of the drop in the dollar could become moot overnight 
should sentiment turn again, sudden swings in the exchange rate can 
hurt day-to-day corporate decision-making. ``The movement affects 
short-term business conditions, too, in terms of competitiveness,'' 
said Aston Bridgman, a spokesman for NEC, the world's second-largest 
semiconductor manufacturer. ``If we're bidding on projects, we can 
quickly become uncompetitive when exchange rates swing like they have 
today and yesterday.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>