<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0428 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What was initially described as a mission of Richard Holbrooke delivering 
a message to Slobodan Milosevic _ comply or else on Kosovo _ has turned 
into negotiations that are being dubbed a ``mini-Dayton,'' U.S. officials 
said Friday. The U.S. envoy, Holbrooke, who negotiated an end to the 
war in Bosnia with a plan that was signed in Dayton, Ohio, ended his 
fifth session with the Yugoslav leader late Friday evening. The pair 
were expected to continue negotiating over the weekend and beyond. 
At the end of more than eight hours of talks Friday, Holbrooke had 
nothing to say to reporters about the likelihood of a NATO attack 
on Serbia. But one U.S. official familiar with the negotiations that 
started Monday said Holbrooke had ``made some progress.'' The official 
said that the outcome of Holbrooke's efforts could still go either 
way: NATO airstrikes against Milosevic or a peaceful resolution to 
the crisis that would include some kind of international presence 
in Kosovo over the approaching winter. The international presence 
would accomplish two things. One would be to allow the verification 
of the withdrawal of extra Yugoslav army and Serbian police sent to 
Kosovo to snuff out a separatist insurgency. The second goal would 
be to ensure that the more than 250,000 ethnic Albanian refugees whose 
homes were torched by the Serb forces be allowed to return to their 
villages and prepare for the winter. A solution could include a ``light'' 
NATO contingent and a ``heavy'' civilian presence, the official said. 
As the negotiations headed for more sessions, some similarities with 
the diplomacy that ended the Bosnia conflict were being drawn. Holbrooke 
is accompanied by a State Department lawyer, Jim O'Brien, a special 
assistant to Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, who drew up the 
the legal framework of the Dayton documents. Holbrooke is also accompanied 
by two high-ranking army generals. The U.S. ambassador to Macedonia, 
Christopher Hill, has been assigned the task of talking to the ethnic 
Albanian leadership in Kosovo and is expected to travel there Saturday, 
while Holbrooke plugs along with Milosevic. Hill will be carrying 
with him an interim plan for the political status of Kosovo. While 
the focus is on Milosevic, whose forces have rampaged through ethnic 
Albanian villages for the last three months, the ethnic Albanian leadership 
in Kosovo has raised the demand of independence that Washington says 
it cannot support. Thus the ethnic Albanians have to be persuaded 
to accept a political plan that puts off the question of Kosovo's 
status for three years but does allow for greater Albanian representation 
in Kosovo's government in the meantime. U.S. officials said there 
were certain incentives built into Holbrooke's offer to Milosevic 
that boiled down to the notion that the easier the Yugoslav leader 
makes it for the West, the more he gets. The harder Milosevic makes 
it, the less he gets. The outline of Holbrooke's approach appears 
to bank on the notion that Milosevic should accept a peaceful resolution 
in order to get a problem off his hands. ``He's spending 76 percent 
of his budget on security while the rest of the country goes to hell,'' 
said a U.S. official. ``That causes problems for him.'' A sign that 
Holbrooke and Milosevic might be inching toward some middle ground 
came from Milsovic's side too. Two days ago, he denounced the threats 
of NATO attacks as ``criminal aggression.'' Friday night, state controlled 
television, which is Milosevic's mouthpiece to his public, was more 
mellow. An announcement said that it was hoped that ``common reason 
would prevail'' and that a ``peaceful solution'' could be found. The 
most immediate of Holbrooke's demands concerns the withdrawal of the 
extra military and police from Kosovo to positions they held before 
fighting started in March and putting away of heavy weapons. The Serbian 
special security police who Washington asserts are responsible for 
atrocities against ethnic Albanians have to be ``reformatted'' in 
a way that restores some confidence to the ethnic Albanians, a U.S. 
official said. The ethnic Albanians outnumber Serbs in the province 
by nine to one but the police and military forces are entirely Serbian. 
It is the visible presence of these security police, some of whom 
can still be seen in their vehicles near the ethnic Albanian villages 
they destroyed, who are intimidating the refugees from returning home. 
The separatist Kosovo Liberation Army, which appears to have been 
weakened but not smashed by the Serbian tank and artillery offensive, 
announced a formal cease-fire Friday. The guerrillas said they would 
suspend operations ``out of respect'' for the negotiating efforts. 
In both Pristina, the capital of Kosovo, and in Belgrade, international 
aid workers began an exodus from Serbia. The U.N. high commissioner 
for refugees said it was withdrawing most of its foreign staff in 
anticipation of a NATO attack. Western embassies continued to send 
non-essential staff and families by road to Hungary Friday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>