<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981009.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Stuck in the streets of high rent downtowns and depressed inner cities 
like abandoned wreckage at the rim of the highway, today's homeless 
seem to be the least mobile of Americans. Yet nothing could be further 
from the image of homelessness that prevailed a hundred years ago, 
when footloose armies of homeless created a network of rowdy ``hobohemias'' 
across the country, made the first protest march on Washington and 
captured the public imagination as a rugged vanguard of radical unionism. 
To scholars investigating this almost-forgotten history, it suggests 
how much the very idea of homelessness _ and our response to it _ 
is linked to the large economic and social changes that underlie dislocations 
of the poor. Kenneth Kusmer, a historian at Temple University whose 
book on homelessness, ``Down and Out, On the Road: Tramps and Vagrants 
in American Society 1865-1940,'' will be published by Oxford University 
Press in the fall of 1999, contends that for all their differences, 
the homeless of our own era and those of the past are fundamentally 
similar. Just as homelessness in the 19th and early 20th centuries 
was a product of the wrenching transition from an agricultural to 
an industrial society, he says, today's homeless are the result of 
an incomplete transition to a post-industrial society. Many people 
assume this country's first real experience with homelessness dates 
from the Great Depression; in fact, homelessness began to surge in 
the last half of the 19th century. But public attitudes toward the 
homeless shifted dramatically between the Civil War and the 1930s, 
from fear and condemnation to a kind of romanticism that turned the 
hobo into an American folk hero. ``Homelessness is at best an odd-job 
word, pressed into service to impose order on a hodgepodge of social 
dislocation, extreme poverty, seasonal or itinerant work, and unconventional 
ways of life,'' Kim Hopper and Jim Baumohl, two veteran researchers 
on homelessness, cautioned in a 1996 essay, ``Redefining the Cursed 
Word: A Historical Interpretation of American Homelessness.'' In the 
colonial period, runaway slaves and servants were among those who 
joined the itinerant indigents known as ``the strolling poor.'' In 
the mid-19th century, a mix of the inebriated and the unlucky slept 
stacked in lodging rooms at the police station that quickly went from 
one-night holding places for transients to a network of de facto homeless 
shelters. As early as 1789, the New York Common Council was worried 
that its almshouse had become ``too much a common receptacle for idle, 
intemperate vagrants, many of whom have no lawful residence,'' and 
who displaced more worthy objects of charity. Such complaints recurred 
across the country for more than 150 years, observed Hopper, who is 
a researcher at the Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research 
in Orangeburg, N.Y., and Baumohl, an associate professor of social 
welfare at Bryn Mawr. Tramps became more prominent in the early 1870s, 
when the end of the Civil War, the rise of wage labor and the boom-and-bust 
cycles of industrialization-in-the-raw sent thousands if not millions 
of the unemployed roaming in search of work or a handout. Over the 
next several decades, these mainly white, native-born, rootless young 
men _ and some women _ created an increasingly politicized subculture 
of hobo encampments near railroad arteries and hard-drinking lodging 
house neighborhoods in western gateway cities like Chicago, Seattle 
and Minneapolis. Successive generations of reformers and policy-makers 
saw their existence as evidence of social and moral crisis in America, 
says Todd Depastino, a young social and cultural historian who has 
been researching the history of homelessness on a grant from the National 
Endowment for the Humanities. In the mid-1890s, in the depths of a 
Gilded Age depression, the ``Industrial Armies of the Unemployed'' 
began recruiting homeless men from western skid row neighborhoods 
for a cross-country ``petition in boots'' to demand a program of public 
works from lawmakers in Washington. Dozens of copycat marches were 
organized from Chicago, San Francisco, and the Pacific Northwest during 
this period of widening inequality and brutal strike-breaking. Hobo 
armies hijacked freight trains, often with the help of railroad workers 
sympathetic to their cause. By 1908, the Industrial Workers of the 
World, known as the Wobblies, had cast hobos as a muscular advance 
guard of American class struggle. In retrospect it seems obvious to 
historians that the nation's expansion and modernization inevitably 
uprooted workers. But mid- to late-19th-century Americans conditioned 
by a more settled artisan and agrarian society saw the resulting ``homelessness'' 
as a threat to social cohesion, the work ethic and family values. 
Even without the specter of anarchism or class warfare, sprawling 
male communities of native-born whites were considered dangerous to 
the nation's health, DePastino adds, especially in the eyes of eugenics-inspired 
reformers worried that ``inferior'' immigrant races were out-reproducing 
``better'' Anglo-Saxon stock. Kusmer traces the rise of a more sympathetic 
image of homelessness in the early 20th century to the growing acceptance 
of rootless underemployment as a feature of a capitalist industrial 
economy rather than as a sign of bad character or social decay. Most 
jobs were temporary or seasonal, and with European immigrants flooding 
the labor market, even full-time, year-round work was usually too 
low-paid to cushion families against illness, industrial accidents 
and the business cycles of that pre-welfare era. By the same token, 
Ford Motor Co.'s factories, which paid the best industrial wages, 
experienced 100 percent turnover on the assembly line in 1905 as workers 
quit to drift on to something else. In this context, DePastino argues, 
the hobo came to represent a kind of manly embrace of insecurity and 
a last-ditch rebellion against the discipline of the factory floor. 
World War I and the mechanization of pivotal Western agricultural, 
railroad and mining operations substantially reduced the size and 
viability of hobohemias tied to seasonal labor. The 1920s saw the 
beginnings of a corporate welfare that used benefits to stabilize 
their work force. Still, until World War II, the ``homeless'' were 
considered a permanent feature of American life. During the Great 
Depression of the 1930s, a new generation of jobless young people 
rode the rails, but the era's migrant poverty was increasingly shaped 
by the automobile, which could carry whole families in search of work, 
like the Joads in the ``Grapes of Wrath,'' their worldly goods lashed 
to a Model T. Migrant families, too, were increasingly preferred by 
farm employers as a more docile work force than their unattached male 
counterparts, DePastino adds. Yet in 1932, he says, when as many as 
60,000 unemployed World War I veterans converged on Washington by 
rail and road to demand their ``bonuses,'' they were clearly the heirs 
of the first hobo armies, and Herbert Hoover had them routed from 
their tent cities by real Army troops, led by Gen. Douglas MacArthur. 
Only World War II, with an unlimited demand for labor, routed homelessness 
itself from America. In late 1942, for example, The San Francisco 
Chronicle reported that even a busload of 74 ``skid road sherry winos'' 
from the Los Angeles County Jail had been accepted by the Kaiser shipyards 
to be trained as welders in lieu of their 90-day sentences. DePastino 
argues that postwar policies like the G.I. Bill, and ``the mass hypersubsidization 
of suburbia'' (through highway construction, for example), were part 
of an explicit federal effort to prevent the return of the volatile 
hobo armies. But African-Americans were largely left out of the benefits, 
he says. And by the 1960s, when the Northern cities of black migration 
were de-industrializing and the last of the skid-row housing faced 
the wrecking ball, the stage was set for the rise of the new homelessness. 
Christopher Jencks, in his unsentimental book ``The Homeless,'' about 
modern-day homelessness, says that as in the nation's period of nascent 
industrialization, the economy of the last 25 years has increasingly 
demanded a flexible labor market, ``one in which labor unions are 
weak, employers can hire and fire at will, and new workers are easy 
to find.'' Such flexibility is often cited by economists as the main 
reason the United States has created more jobs and adapted better 
to globalization than Europe. But the dark side, Jencks points out, 
is that it guarantees some workers will never find steady employment. 
In the past, residence in skid-row housing was precisely what defined 
such people as homeless. Yet Dennis Culhane, who does data analysis 
for the homeless shelters of New York City and Philadelphia, notes 
that today, when ``homeless'' means either to be without shelter or 
to live in a shelter, the leading remedies for homelessness are, in 
effect, modern versions of the old flophouse. ``If you take the historic 
view of this,'' he said, ``what we're calling solutions to homelessness 
today are really what we called homelessness in the past.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>