<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981009.2000.1254 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. Venezuelan will chose a new president 
in two months and it's a good bet that the driving issue in the election 
will be the economy. Despite it's vast oil reserves, Venezuela's economic 
performance has been erratic for three decades now. THE WORLD's Maurice 
Alreyes introduces us to an American entrepreneur in Caracas who is 
riding those ups and downs of the Venezuelan economy. Barbara Houser 
is a 50-year-old American whose has been living in Venezuela for the 
last 27 years. She runs her own consulting business in Caracas. On 
a week night Barbara and her Venezuelan partner lead a two-hour seminar 
on the art of becoming a business person. They're here to answer questions 
from a group of small entrepreneurs about the rewards and pitfalls 
of running a business in such an unstable and unpredictable economy 
as Venezuela. Barbara started her company, the Covey Leadership Center 
back in 1992, during a period of recession in Venezuela. We began 
based on the concept that we would need to grow leaders from the inside 
out in Venezuela as they did everywhere else in THE WORLD. And one 
of the things that we did was to start a business based on how to 
help people get out of that hole that they were in. For the last 15 
years Venezuelans have fallen into the hole of recession several times. 
Economic crises here come and go in cycles. Every time Venezuelans 
have been hit by high unemployment levels, even higher interest rates, 
and inflation figures well above their purchasing power. Once again, 
people here smell recession in the air. Barbara Houser expects this 
new crisis will have a negative impact on her business. Very much 
so. We're probably looking at finishing the fiscal year with at least 
20 to 30 percent less income than we had expected. Costs have risen. 
We definitely see people holding back on their commitments. The Venezuelan 
economy is almost entirely dependent on its oil revenues. So, whenever 
there's a shift in the oil market, the economy suffers, making everyone 
nervous. Pedro Palma is a Venezuelan economist who advises foreign 
companies and individuals about investment opportunities in his country. 
He explains the background of the current economic crisis in Venezuela. 
Our expected average price of exports of higher carbons for 1998 will 
be $5.00 lower than the previous year. In addition, Venezuela is cutting 
production in order to cope with the crisis, making the total loss 
to be in the range of $6.5 to $7 billion. And in the case that we 
are an oil dependent economy, that means a dramatic negative effect. 
Dramatic as it may be, the general perception here is that the current 
economic situation in Venezuela could well be temporary. Economist 
Pedro Palma dismisses an report about Venezuela being on the verge 
of collapse. Of course we have without any question, a serious crisis. 
We have a deep crisis, but I can say that Venezuela also has lots 
of resources in order to cultivate a negative impacts. Despite these 
assessments, both local and foreign investors are cautious and expectant. 
American entrepreneur Barbara Houser is used to the uncertainties 
of Venezuela's economy. I would say that the opportunities are there 
for people who can also see beyond the borders of Venezuela and look 
at regional opportunities. I think the economic climate is basically 
going to be the product of the decisions that we make in the private 
sector. So, how many of these letters are mine? Barbara Houser? Yes. 
This one. And this must be a bill. At her house in Caracas, thousands 
of miles from her native Iowa, Barbara Houser shares a quiet moment 
with her Venezuelan husband. For her Venezuela is more than just the 
political and economic uncertainties this country goes through from 
time to time. The best thing that's happened to me in the 27-years 
that I've been here is that I've been able to raise two children in 
a society where family is still important, where friendship is important, 
where people visit with each other and communicate with each other. 
I have everything to be thankful to the naswano for. Barbara Houser 
says she's here to stay. She plans to continue expanding her company, 
and creating new leadership seminars to help Venezuelan entrepreneurs 
deal with crisis now and in the future. For THE WORLD, Maurice Alreyes 
in Caracas, Venezuela. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>