<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981009.2000.0922 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the Mid East Summit less than a week away, Benjamin Netanyahu 
has made a provocative appointment. Israel's prime minister has named 
cabinet hawk Ariel Sharon, to be his new foreign minister and Sharon 
has accepted. Sharon has strong support among Israeli hard-liners. 
But 15 years ago, an Israeli tribunal found him indirectly responsible 
for a massacre of Lebanese civilians by Israeli-backed militia men 
in two Beirut refugee camps. THE WORLD's Richard Myron is in Jerusalem. 
Richard, should we be surprised that Prime Minister Netanyahu is appointing 
perhaps the hawk of all hawks as his foreign minister? I don't think 
there's enormous surprise in Israel about this. Certainly, it makes 
political sense from the point of view of the prime minister. If he 
wants to have an agreement next week in Washington, or with the Palestinians, 
he needs to get on board Ariel Sharon. Ariel Sharon can deliver a 
deal that will be accepted by the right in Israel, by the settler 
movement. They respect him. They respect his toughness for all of 
the same reasons maybe that he's vilified and viewed with suspicion 
by the Palestinians and by many of the Arab states. So he's the man 
who can be seen to deliver this deal. Also he's the man who in a way 
can protect the prime minister. In Washington, for example, next week 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu will say I can't bend as far as 
you the Americans want me to bend, because I have on board my foreign 
minister Ariel Sharon and I can't, I can't give in too much to the 
pressures within my own government. Any one who has followed Ariel 
Sharon will certainly find him unforgettable for his bluster, for 
his right wing positions, vis-a-vis the Palestinians. What kind of 
a deal will he himself accept, that he can then present to the right 
wing of the party. Well, Sharon is very much of a hard-liner. Just 
last week he said he wouldn't shake the hand of Yasser Arafat. He 
said in the past he wouldn't accept a deal which would hand over more 
land to the Palestinian authority which he innately distrusts. It's 
unclear exactly as to exactly what he will or won't agree to. But 
clearly by accepting this post, he's signaled that he will agree to 
this or in principle to parts of this agreement that's on the table, 
this 13 percent hand back or withdrawal of Israeli forces from the 
West Bank. Well, you've presented a form of political thinking which 
may be the Israelis can appreciate or accept. What about the Palestinians. 
Are they going to find his appointment as an indication that maybe 
they are closer to actually reaching an agreement with the Israeli 
government? I think they may find themselves at a place to reach an 
agreement but it may not be an agreement they want to reach. Clearly, 
Ariel Sharon is a man who is viewed with disdain to put it mildly 
by many Palestinians. He was in charge of commando units in the 1950s 
and '60s which tracked down infiltrators, guerrilla groups, and dealt 
with them ruthlessly. And of course he's the way who was defense minister, 
who in the 1980s who began the Lebanon war, who blockaded Beirut in 
an attempt, effectively wipe out the PLO. He is a man who is viewed 
with intense suspicion and I'm sure that the Palestinians are unhappy 
about this. They're going to see this as a victory for the right as 
well as a victory for Sharon for himself. But I think that they are 
also realistic. They have to deal with the political realities that 
exist here and now in Israel today. And they're dealing with a government 
which isn't left wing. They're dealing with a government which is 
right wing, which is lead Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and now 
has this confirmation of the kind of ideological stance that the government 
takes with Ariel Sharon as the foreign minister. THE WORLD's Richard 
Myron is in Jerusalem. Thanks Richard. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>