<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981009.2000.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. It may have been Holbrooke's last 
try and Milosevic's last stand. U.S. mediator Richard Holbrooke met 
today for the fourth time this week with Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic, 
in an effort to end the Kosovo crisis. NATO has been threatening airstrikes 
against Serbia unless Milosevic withdraws his troops and ends his 
seven month crack down on the ethnic Albanian majority in Kosovo. 
THE WORLD's Nenen Shabek is in Belgrade. Nenen, what can you tell 
us about the meeting. We have diplomatic sources telling us that today's 
round of talks was intense and ongoing, whatever that means. We do 
know that he will be seeing President Milosevic once again during 
the course of the evening. It's not hard nowadays for even the average 
citizen to find out what some of the military strategic thinking might 
be. We've heard that NATO is going to release up to 450 planes for 
an attack should it come. Can you tell us anything more about what 
shape the military operation might take? Well, the military strategists 
here believe that there are sort of like two major options. The first 
one would be sort of a step by step increase in the strength of the 
air attacks, whereby possibly the first strike could include maybe 
just a few cruise missiles, a few tomahawks, to hit a few targets 
as a kind of a warning to President Milosevic. There are other military 
analysts who believe that NATO will use all the force it has in the 
first go, in order to minimize possible sort of losses to its own 
aircraft and its own manpower. In other words, it will go with all 
it has on the military installations, primarily anti-aircraft military 
installations which means missile sites, and anti-aircraft missile 
sites, and also airfields which are used by the Yugoslav air force. 
What are the demands that are being made on Milosevic at this point? 
What would he have to do to comply with those demands and to avert 
a NATO military strike? Well, there are several demands and some of 
them are -- they're actually very, very specific. The fighting has 
to stop in Kosovo. He's got to withdraw all the security forces and 
the heavy armor. He's got to organize a return of refugees to their 
homes, and to start meaningful negotiations with ethnic Albanians 
about the future status of the province. He's also got to cooperate 
fully with The Hague war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. 
And allow full access to Kosovo to international observers who can 
verify that all these demands are indeed being complied with. You 
have listed all the demands that are being made of Milosevic. Has 
he complied with any of them, or made any significant moves in the 
direction of addressing any of those demands? Yes he has. His forces 
have stopped making any offensives in Kosovo. The police has now been 
on the offensive for more than ten days now in the province. He has 
withdrawn a number of military units, including tank brigade from 
Kosovo. He has offered negotiations to the ethnic Albanians. The Serbian 
delegation has been in Kosovo's capitol Pristina more than 20 times 
waiting in an empty room for the ethnic Albanian leaders to turn up. 
And he has allowed partial access to Kosovo to international observers 
and trade agencies. Have any of his actions been met by the West as 
a sign that he indeed is trying to cooperate? Well, the West is saying 
that most of this is just window dressing; that it wants full compliance 
and not partial compliance. So, the answer is they don't really buy 
it? no. Would it be fair to say then Nanen, that it would be hard 
to find anybody in Belgrade right now who does not believe that the 
bombs will fall before the week is out? Well, as long as Holbrooke 
is here, people don't believe that the bombs will fall, but most people 
here believe that NATO will strike. Nanen Shabek, THE WORLD's correspondent, 
speaking to us from Belgrade. Thank you very much. You're welcome 
Tony. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>