<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981009.2000.0588 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today Slobodan Milosevic put into effect a harsh decree tightening 
state control over companies and independent media and banning the 
rebroadcast of foreign news transmissions in Serbian. Milosevic shows 
no signs of backing down. And as THE WORLD's Jeb Sharp reports, that's 
no surprise to those who have dealt with the Serbian leader in the 
past. Diplomats who know Milosevic and reporters who have covered 
him have many adjectives to describe him. Skilled, talented, charming, 
ruthless, brutal, power hungry. On his early days he was simply an 
opportunist, says Laura Silber author of "Yugoslavia: Death of a Nation." 
He was almost a communist party aparatchik. He was totally dedicated 
to rising to the top. And I think that as he moved up the ranks in 
the 1970s and 1980s he had his eyes on the prize. He was ready to 
move up, and he was ready to do whatever it took. When communism began 
to disintegrate in the former Yugoslavia, Milosevic sensed the power 
he could get by stirring up nationalist resentments amongst his fellow 
Serbs. The strategy took him straight to the top. And it started in 
Kosovo in 1989. That's when the west realized Milosevic might not 
be the Gorbachev like figure they had hoped for. What he did in Kosovo 
was systematically abolish the autonomy that the province of Kosovo 
had. And he did this by political means as well as by violent means, 
using the security forces. What followed was the Bosnian war and years 
of chaos and bloodshed in the former Yugoslavia. Warren Zimmerman, 
the U.S. ambassador to Yugoslavia from 1989 to 1992, considers Slobodan 
Milosevic the villain. He's the coldest person I think I have ever 
met, somebody who doesn't seem to put any value on individual human 
beings, even Serbs. I've heard him say really terrible things about 
fellow Serbs. He's a man who can't be reached by goodwill. He can't 
be reached by reason. He can't be reached by appealing to human decency. 
He is perfectly prepared to see thousands of people killed in the 
interest of his own policies. Secretary of State Eagleberger named 
Milosevic on December 16, 1992 as a potential war criminal... New 
York Times correspondent, Roger Cohen. You spoke of command responsibility 
for the crimes in Bosnia, that's to say essentially the establishment 
of the concentration camps in Europe, where large numbers of people 
were being held, tortured and killed. Eagleberger spoke very -- quite 
specifically about the potential command responsibility and named 
Milosevic. Yet Cohen says the United States was prepared to overlook 
Milosevic's culpability in order to give him a seat at the Dayton 
peace talks. We, three-and-a-half years later flew him into Dayton, 
put him in a limousine, took him to the Wright Patterson Air Base 
and spoke to him as a -- as the interlocker -- that we had chosen 
in order to make an albeit imperfect peace in Bosnia. But those charged 
with forging a peace in the Balkans, felt they had to deal with Milosevic. 
Carl Bilt, co-chaired the Dayton peace talks. If you have to make 
peace, you need to make peace between those that are waging the war. 
There's no other way. And you have to get all of them to talk to each 
other, not through the gun barrels, but over the negotiating table. 
But the reason the United States has to deal with Milosevic according 
to Roger Cohen, is that the international community has never made 
a concerted effort to get rid of him. I still don't understand why 
he hasn't been indicted by the tribunal in The Hague. I think that 
the whole question of the indictment of Milosevic has been avoided 
and why we have chosen to work with him for this long, it's a question 
that points at our collective failure and I think that that collective 
failure continues. But Balkans expert Laura Silber says since Milosevic 
is still in power, the West has to work with him. He still is the 
one whose signature they want on any potential agreement. Yet, I don't 
-- and so I think that the West of course they're dealing with him. 
They're going into Belgrade; they're dealing with him. What I would 
hope is they're not going this time to say -- slap him on the back 
and have long drinks of Scotch over hours and hours of dinners. I 
think what will happen this time is Mr. Milosevic has gone much too 
far and that if he is able to reach an agreement of a political settlement 
in Kosovo, I don't think that President Clinton and other European 
leaders will be there to shake President Milosevic's hand. For THE 
WORLD, I'm Jeb Sharp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>