<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981005.1830.1204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week we are going to take "A closer look" at privacy. There is 
simply no doubt about it, we have less than we used to have. The digital 
age has made us all more vulnerable. And living in a country where 
people are so inclined to file lawsuits has not helped. Tonight, we 
are going to focus on privacy in the workplace, because as it turns 
out, our employers are increasingly able to know an enormous amount 
about us if they choose. And they do choose. The American management 
association surveyed 1,000 of its member companies, more than 40% 
of the companies say that they watch and listen to their employees 
every day. It's safe to say that in the digital world almost everything 
you do is recorded. This woman knows all about keeping an eye on employees. 
Her company, computer forensics, is hired to do just that. Is my fax 
machine vulnerable, is my telephone vulnerable, is all the electronic 
equipment in my office vulnerable? It's easy to forget that there's 
these little devices that we're so used to using that can store amazing 
amounts of information. And that's a lot of recording. These days, 
all the every day office tools have memory chips. And somewhere in 
your company there may be a machine like this scanning the output 
of every member of the company. Perhaps recording you. Companies routinely 
listen to voice mail, read E-mail and check computer files. Even if 
you think you have deleted them. Files can be restored on your computer. 
It just takes a few seconds to get them back. Voice mail can be retrieved 
too, the law protects phone calls we make to an outside number but 
any voice mail or internal calls are company property. So whatigsen 
does an employee have? The law doesn't protect the employees when 
they walk in the door in terms of privacy. Companies tenned to say 
they monitor employees to protect themselves against lawsuits and 
theft. All of these legitimate reasons why employers will monitor 
employees. But it doesn't make it right to do it without telling the 
employees. The American management survey says that 93% of the companies 
surveyed do inform their employees, though there is no federal law 
that says they must. People come to the office every day. They're 
used to being in the office. Do they tenned to forget they should 
be on guard? Yes, they do. You've seen this where, for example, there's 
video surveillance and the cameras will go up and for the first few 
days that the cameras are in place people are dressing better they're 
sitting up straighter. They're acting differently. But after just 
usually like two or three days, that wears off. There is no question 
we are all vulnerable with so much information out there. What might 
be more surprising is the way some employers use all that information. 
Even things they come across by accident, even things that are not 
true. ABC's Michele Norris begins in Kentucky. Ben Walker dedicated 
30 years of his life to FBI. But the job took its toll. Struggling 
with depression, Walker began seeing a psychiatrist referred to him 
by the FBI. I was convinced that it should have remained confidential. 
But it did not. Here's what happened -- Walker's doctor was investigated 
for committing fraud.ab state officials discovered allegations that 
Walker was abusing prescription drugs. That information was sent to 
the FBI and used to force Walker off the job, even though the allegations 
turned out to be false. I'm glad that I got help. But I don't think 
I should have paid the price. Increasingly, employers walk a fine 
line between checking out employees and violating their privacy. A 
recent study of 300 fortune 500 companies found that more than one-third 
review medical records before hiring or promoting employees. Computerized 
background checks are now common place, and workers are especially 
vulnerable when a mistake shows up in their files. Bronti Kelly, for 
example, has a long criminal record, even though he's never been arrested. 
why? Because a thief stole Kelly's wallet and used the stolen I.D. 
during several arrests. It has become an entangled nightmare that 
I wouldn't wish on anyone. The real bronti Kelly now carries a letter 
confirming that he is not a criminal. But when potential employers 
run background checks, his criminal record still shows up. It will 
say for the rest of my life, "bronti W. Kelly, arrested for arson, 
shoplifting, burglary," and so on. And I will be forever scarred for 
the rest of my life with that information on my file. In the workplace 
of the future, privacy may well become a thing of the past. Michele 
Norris, ABC News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>