<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981005.1830.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening N Washington today the republicans and the democrats 
on the Judiciary committee and the House of Representatives have been 
laying out their contrary positions about impeachment of President 
Clinton. It certainly qualified as a historic day, only twice before 
have presidents faced such extreme action by the Congress. It was 
a partisan day to afault. We'll start with ABC Linda Douglass The 
democrats fought hard to limit the scope of any impeachment inquiry 
and to giver it some kind of a deadline. The republicans defeated 
them an a straight party line vote. This evening's vote came after 
the republican counsel argued Kenneth Starr's case against the president 
involves much more than sex. The assertions of presidential misconduct 
cited in the referral, though arising initially out of sexual indregss 
are completely distinct and involve allegations of an ongoing series 
of deliberate and direct assaults by Mr. Clinton upon the justice 
system of the United States. David shippers argued the president, 
Monica Lewinsky a others may have been part of a conspiracy. To illustrate 
the close coordination of the key players, he listed a series of phone 
calls they made to each other in the hours after the president gave 
his deposition in the Paula Jones case. That was when Mr. Clinton 
realized Jones' lawyers knew a lot about Monica Lewinsky. Mr. Jordan 
uses his cellular phone to once again contact the White House. At 
1:45 P.M., the president telephones Betty Currie at home. At 2:29 
P.M., Vernon Jordan again telephones the White House from a cellular 
phone and then enters the White House 15 minutes later. He charged 
the conspiracy was carried out when the president and others gave 
false statements and allegedly concealed evidence. He also changed 
the perjury charges in Starr's report to making false statements under 
oath because that is easier to prove. He charged Mr. Clinton aided 
Lewinsky in making a false affidavit in the Jones case. President 
abused the power of his office. The democrats lawyers scoffed at the 
new allegations saying the case against the president only comes down 
to one thing. That is that the president was engaged in an improper 
relationship which he did not want disclosed is the core charge that 
Mr. Starr and the majority staff suggests triggers that constitutional 
crisis Democrats argued nothing the president has done should lead 
to impeachment. Impeachment is not about adultery. It is rooted in 
a constitutional standard that has met the test of time. It is about 
subversion of government Some republicans charge Mr. Clinton is destroying 
the presidency. We are witnessing nothing less than the symptoms of 
a cancer on the American presidency. It is virtually certain that 
the house will vote to hold impeachment hearings, in which members 
of Congress may have to ask Monica Lewinsky very detailed questions 
about sexual relations with the president. And Peter, no one knows 
the political consequences of that. Thank you. Linda Douglass on Capitol 
Hill. we're joined tonight by our legal analyst. This is a political 
environment. On the legal issue, why all this talk today about conspiracy? 
Well, what happened today was the republicans showed that in that 
respect they're being even more aggressive than Ken Starr. They're 
alleging that the President Clinton and Monica Lewinsky together decided 
to obstruct justice so that under the law, they are each responsible 
for the crimes of each other. And that ratchets up the level of accusations 
against the president even more. As you listened to it today, impressive? 
It's certainly a very circumstantial case. All these phone calls, 
they're suggestive of what went on, but again, there's no proof of 
what was said in any of these phone calls. A lot of the facts are 
known in this case and it seems like many of them have already made 
up their minds on how they'll vote. Thanks very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>