<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981005.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government continued to push Monday for foreign aid to rescue 
the tattered Russian economy after a top official said modernizing 
the country's nuclear missile force was a top priority. Prime Minister 
Yevgeny Primakov's government is still trying to come up with a strategy 
to deal with the country's economic crisis after Russian currency 
and financial markets collapsed in August. International financial 
institutions are reluctant to resume loans until the government unveils 
its economic strategy. First Deputy Prime Minister Yuri Maslyukov, 
a former top Soviet economic official, said that in addition to dealing 
with the crisis, the government must pursue long-term goals, such 
as modernizing its aging nuclear arsenal. ``We must guarantee that 
in case of any unforeseen incident we have a strong nuclear shield 
that would ensure our security and be capable of inflicting irreparable 
damage to the enemy,'' he said in a television interview Sunday night. 
Maslyukov said he backs ratification of the START II arms reduction 
agreement with the United States that has been repeatedly delayed 
by the Russian parliament. He added, however, that the ratification 
must hinge on progress on further arms cuts and Russia speeding up 
production of the new Topol-M ballistic missiles to replace aging 
weapons. ``We must take steps to produce at least 35-40 such missiles 
a year,'' he said. The Topol-M entered service last fall, but the 
cash-strapped government has only been able to procure a small number 
of them, according to media reports. Primakov and Maslyukov have insisted 
possible plans to reduce free economic activity were just one of many 
options under consideration. Leaks in the Russian media that the new 
government would roll back market reforms have worried Russian and 
foreign business leaders. Maslyukov specifically denied that he favors 
ending the ruble's convertibility or nationalization of banks. ``There 
are no grounds to say anyone in this government plans to ban the use 
of the dollar, limit the import of dollars or the right of residents 
to buy or sell dollars,'' Maslyukov said. ``That is nonsense.'' But 
the Russian government says it must have more foreign loans. Russia's 
Finance Minister Mikhail Zadornov and Central Bank Chairman Viktor 
Gerashchenko, in Washington for meetings with international lenders, 
have been asking the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank 
to deliver an earlier agreed loan package. The IMF put the dlrs 4.8 
billion loan on hold following the previous government's decision 
to devalue the ruble and reschedule domestic debt _ the very moves 
that the international aid package was intended to avoid. The IMF 
and other international lenders have made it clear that next loans 
could be granted only after Russia comes up with a sound economic 
program to strengthen the ruble, ease the banking crisis and solve 
the debts owed on treasury bills. Although the outcome of the talks 
with lenders remains uncertain, the government has already stated 
that foreign loans will be a chief source of revenue to cover a huge 
deficit in the fourth quarter. Primakov last week strongly urged the 
IMF and other lenders to deliver aid and warned that their refusal 
would push Russia toward ``unpopular'' decisions, which he did not 
spell out. With Russian tax collection chronically below target, the 
IMF's refusal to give credits would mean that the government would 
have to pay for a huge deficit nearing 100 billion rubles (dlrs 6 
billion) by printing new money _ a move certain to trigger high inflation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>