<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981005.2130.1492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
a sitcom set during the civil war is heading to the small screen. 
but some people say it should not air. ron tank reports. with the 
famous paramount gate in the background, more than 200 demonstrators 
marched and chanted monday morning, upset over a comedy the studio 
produces -- a comedy set in the time of the civil war. while they 
have a right to carry it, we have a right to protest it. and we shall 
protest it across the entire country. "the secret diary of desmond 
pfeiffer" is a sitcom about a black english butler and adviser to 
abraham lincoln. pfeiffer is not only the only black character, he's 
the only intelligent one. the president is portrayed as a womanizer, 
his wife, oversexed, general ulysses s. grant, a drunk. man is that 
smooth! with you at the helm, i better brush up on my cotton-picking 
skills. the references to slavery are what have several african-american 
groups calling for upn to take the show off its schedule. well, i 
don't think it's a first amendment issue. you know, some people would 
say are we talking about censorship. i would say, no, i think we're 
talking about decency. a scene that jokes about the hanging of two 
men in england has become a rallying cry for protesters, even though 
the offending footage was removed from the pilot episode. what sets 
this aside from other tv protests is the involvement of the los angeles 
city council, which ordered the city's human relations commission 
to look at the pilot and decide on its appropriateness. it raises 
the level of public discourse on important matters. i don't know how 
anyone could delude themselves into thinking that a sitcom is somehow 
sacrosanct. not everyone agrees that the sitcom is racist. "l.a. times" 
tv critic howard rosenberg calls the protest show boating. the show's 
star, chi mcbride, says, if anything, his character is a role model. 
you know, he's not a slave, he's an employee. i mean, he gets fired 
in the third episode. and this guy is clearly in charge of every situation 
that he's in. he's a combination of benson, john cleese and sgt. bilko. 
upn decided to temporarily pull the pilot and run another episode 
in its place. upn's ceo dean valentine refused an on-camera interview, 
but told "the hollywood reporter" -- this is not going to end. as 
soon as they announce who the sponsors are, we're going after the 
sponsors. ironically, protest often helps a new show. "married with 
children", "all in the family" and "dawson's creek" all seemed to 
attract a bigger audience following public complaint. mcbride says 
he's not upset with the protesters. it's just a lot of people serving 
themselves and using this as a platform. and i can't be mad at them. 
they want to be on tv just like me. ron tank, cnn, hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>