<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981005.2130.0163 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
the house judiciary committee is sending a resolution to the full 
house recommending an impeachment inquiry of president clinton. after 
hours of debailt tonight, committee members approved the republican 
resolution exactly along party lines. the full house will begin debating 
the measure thursday or friday. before today's vote, they heard from 
both democratic and republican investigators who analyze the evidence 
in the starr report. candy crowley has that. two well-schooled, experienced 
lawyers poured over the same case and came away disagreeing on the 
whole and the parts -- on the gifts, the president gave monica lewinsky 
that ended up under bettie currie's bed. both said lewinsky first 
suggested the subpoenaed material should be concealed. but the republicans 
top investigator sees a president who went along with the idea. the 
president stated, "i don't know" or "let me think about that." ms. 
lewinsky testified that ms. currie contacted her at home several hours 
later and stated, "i understand you have something to give me" or 
"the president said you have something to give me." but the democrats 
chief counsel lowell sees a president unconcerned about the gifts. 
he actually gave ms. lewinsky additional gifts after she expressed 
concern about them and after he knew they were subpoenaed, hardly 
the acts of a man set on obstruction. on whether the president tried 
to get lewinsky a job as a way to get her to lie in the paula jones 
case -- mr. jordan secured a job for ms. lewinsky with a phone call 
placed on the day after ms. lewinsky signed a false affidavit protecting 
the president. hasn't everyone now seen that the job search began 
by others than the president long before the jones case issue arose. 
and perhaps most importantly -- since this is congress and not a court 
of law, the two sides have vastly different ideas of an impeachable 
offense. if president nixon's alleged lies to the irs about his taxes 
were not grounds for impeachment in 1974, how then are alleged lies 
about president clinton's private sexual relationship with ms. lewinsky 
grounds in 1998. the subject matter of the underlying case, whether 
civil or criminal and the circumstances under which the testimony 
is given are of no significance whatever. it is the oath itself that 
is sacred and must be enforced. whatever else, it was a day that defined 
the fault lines. one side sees a president who conspired to falsify 
testimony and conceal evidence, the other side sees a more ordinary 
story of a married man trying to conceal an affair. candy crowley, 
cnn, capitol hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>