<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981005.2100.2497 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A new book out, bige are a fist examens the first black Supreme Court 
justice, thurgood Marshall. It's called "thurgood Marshall: American 
revolutionary." Its author, Juan Williams is the author of "eyes on 
the prize," the history of the movement for the past 21 years. He's 
been a political analyst and national correspondent for "The Washington 
Post." Juan, it's good to see you again. Nice to see you, Brian. We 
had the introduction to say first African-American justice because 
he hated that term. He barely was able to call himself black in this 
day. He preferred the word Negro. It speaks to his curmudgeon lyness. 
He was fascinating. What left the American scene when thurgood Marshall 
left the bench? I think what left is a sense of purpose. Marshall 
was so clear throughout his career and time on the Supreme Court that 
his goal was integration. He was a firm believer that the constitution 
should protect individual rights and integration was part of that 
vision. He was a man who said basically, if you want equal protection 
in this country, if you want political powers and the resources of 
the country to be given to you on an equal basis, make sure you're 
in the main stream. Today we see lots of people discuss issues of 
race on the high court and it's time to go back to a color blind basis 
despite the history of extreme color consciousness in our society. 
I think in the general public, the arguments of civil rights go on 
to nationalistic tones. People say you don't have to have a black 
child and a white sitting together to get a good education. Marshall 
would have viewed those as steps backwards. He wasn't allowed to go 
to the law school he wanted to attend at first. When he got to the 
court which has been populated with Ivy league-educated white guys 
and they would gather around and listen to his stories because he 
was the only one among them who had tried a murder case. He had been 
in the real world and they had not. He brought a whole new view of 
the law, correct? This plays out on so many levels. Lots of people 
relate to Marshall as the first afro American Supreme Court justice. 
He was a great protector of defendants. He was the only one who defended 
someone who was charged with a capital crime among his brethren on 
the high court. When he talked about abortions, he could discuss the 
back Alley abortions he'd seen in Baltimore. When he was an argument 
about the homeless, in one case he said to the attorney he argued 
about having people sleep in Lafayette park, he said, young man, have 
you been in a situation you had to sleep? The street? The lawyer said, 
no. He said, you don't understand why it's important for those people 
to be able to sleep there to make their stands and protest under the 
conditions they have to live. The revisions with Marshall includes 
an unflattering look. You talked to some people in Washington which 
you deal with in the book and that is how heavily clerked he was at 
the end. He would sit in his office. He was famous for watching soap 
operas on television. When his friend Bill brennan came in the office, 
the two of them would author some of the most incredible, usually 
5-4 dissents, but the last of the two Pillars of liberalism, there 
they are together. I think this argument over whether or not Marshall 
was overly reliant on his cleshes was interesting. When Marshall was 
appointed to the second circuit court of appeals in New York, his 
confirmation process took a year. A lot of southern segregationists 
didn't want him on the court. He was just a civil rights lawyer and 
doesn't have a breath of experience. What Marshall did was to get 
the best clerks from the best law schools. But then later on in the 
Supreme Court years, people began to complain, they said, it's not 
Marshall's work, it's the law clerks. It's a double sword. He had 
good law clerks and Marshall was a brilliant man. None of the clerks 
said I was making the decisions. They drafted opinions but Marshall 
had the final word. I don't think that's different than what goes 
on in the Chambers of any other Supreme Court justice. Marshall tught 
he was burnt by the press. If you remember the brethren they portrayed 
Marshall as lazing around and watching too much TV. He got a bum deal 
he thought. I think he did. He did like to watch T vrk. Juan Williams 
has written "thurgood Marshall: American revolutionary" which is in 
course of the book is a history lesson in itself. It talks about a 
huge swath of the American republic. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>