<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981005.2100.2801 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Juan, good to see you again. Thanks for coming on. Thank you. When 
we come back, a look at the big three news magazines. Including one, 
the biggest problems Al Gore's got. Have you ever made a long- distance 
call that was so short, you wish you didn't have to pay for it? Hi, 
it's jodi... and this is Bill! And nobody's home! You got that right. 
Just sign up now, and calls you make that are less than 30 seconds 
are free. So if you make a quick call, get an answering machine or 
a wrong number, at least you won't have to pay for it. Hey, don't 
say a word. I just called to tell you... "I love you." I'm deeply 
touched. Jane? Of course, the reason you call long distance is to 
talk, so when your call lasts longer than 30 seconds, it's just a 
dime a minute... plus you'll get short calls free. Hey, mom. I use 
a cup full of this laundry stuff, right? Oh, a cap-full. I gotta go. 
Put time on your side. Get a dime anytime and short calls free. @ 
Monday night, time for our first of the week look at the big three 
news weekly magazines just now hitting newsstands, airports, mailboxes 
around the country. Let's look at the covers. U.S. news takes on America 
before the Indian discoveries. "Time" looks at the Duke University 
medical center. A week in the life of a hospital. And "Newsweek" prophetic, 
I hope it doesn't come prophetic. The crash of 1999. Here here's why 
it might. Inside "U.S. news" -- so just a reminder if you're going 
to be flying on air force one, use the beige phones for any other 
calls than calling home and saying you late. Also in "U.S. news" inside 
"time." ""time" magazine." Any parallels, keep to yourself. "Newsweek" 
-- Linda Tripp -- news week -- "Newsweek" -- also inside "Newsweek" 
-- it goes on to say -- gives him something to wake up for every morning, 
doesn't it? When we come back, a look at what's in the morning paperles. 
Are rich people taller than the rest of us? Are their loved ones more 
deserving of an air bag? Was the sun created solely for their enjoyment? 
Are we the only car company that doesn't think so? Century by Buick. 
Full of amenities for under $20,000. Loaded for under $24,000. Century 
by Buick. Introducing the remarkably innovative GE profile performance 
range with a revolutionary bridge that connects burners, so you can 
cook any size dish. And its truetemp oven is the most accurate in 
America, so you can also bake and broil like a gourmet. It's so versatile, 
you could get carried away. Uh, dad. I usually just have cereal for 
breakfast. The incredible profile performance range. Only from GE. 
Basically, I guess my J is to break stuff. We try to think of everythi 
that a customer might do and try that against the softwar and if we 
find something. Then we can make it Bette because, once the customer 
gets the software... it needs to Wor software's tough to make... but 
our job is to make the best it can B Our overnight canvass of tomorrow 
morning's newspapers shows the Judiciary committee the lead story. 
Kosovo, the economic situation, which brings us to "The Washington 
Post." About that confab, the G-7 folks, they talked about them. Nothing. 
A little hope they would come up with any new bold action. They talk 
about an emergency response for the next crisis more than solving 
this one. That may be an oxymoron. "Denver post," were you among the 
people who bought Boston chicken at $50 a share? It closed at 50 cent 
today. It might be closed period. They filed for bankruptcy. 178 restaurants 
are ixne. When the analysts looked for a cause, it started too far, 
too fast. Sort of a Rookie startup business mistake. Drunk on their 
own success, they couldn't play their bills. A hard-luck story, a 
success having fizzled. A lot of people liked their food while they 
lasted. Miami Herald, a hero is back in town. John Glenn is arriving 
at the space station on Tuesday for his final rehearsal. He's lucky 
he has accommodations. Those who don't don't have any luck either. 
250,000 people want to see that thing take off. Who can blame them? 
But there's no accommodations left, obviously. They've been sold out 
for months. And U.S. today cover story. Get ready to meet generation 
Y. they've never dialed a rotary phone but they can format a computer 
desk. They're replacing gen-Xers. They're teenagers. Their spending 
power is giving them clout on Madison avenue among other places. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>