<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981005.2100.0294 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From the capitol after a long tough night at the White House, news 
of the committee vote hit about an hour ago, the administration is 
now officially fighting for its survival just in case there was doubt 
of that earlier. NBC news White House correspondent Claire Shipman 
is with us from the north lawn of the White House. Claire, this part 
of the process is not up to them. They can't stop it but what was 
the reaction to this? Well, they certainly were not expecting any 
other outcome than what we've seen tonight. I think to some extent 
there was relief here that there weren't any surprises on the republican 
side. But aside from the same grim mood that they've had for months 
now, the public face has been, as has been White House strategy, business 
as usual. The president visiting with fundraisers and meeting with 
democratic leaders to bemoan the lack of legislative progress and 
turning to the world financial crisis meeting with international bank 
leaders to talk about that and he'll give a strong speech on that 
tomorrow. Superficially, they are free to criticize, what can they 
do behind the scenes on this? They can do quite a bit. One thing they 
have to do is wait and see how it plays out. One part of their strategy 
is clear, that's attack Ken Starr. Tonight, for example, the White 
House released a letter from the president's personal lawyer, David 
Kendall to janeth Reno, the attorney general asking to see the original 
requests in all the information that Ken Starr turned over to janeth 
Reno when he asked his authority to investigate this matter be broadened 
in January, why, essentially David Kendall is claiming there may have 
been conflicts of interests that Starr misled janeth Reno. There was 
some question that Starr learned about the Lewinsky matter from Linda 
Tripp or learned from the Paula Jones attorneys. Here is one bit of 
the letter. The recent disclosure of recently unreported contacts 
by Ms. Tripp to the Paula Jones lawyers, to Starr intermediaries and 
working with Starr's team in contact with the O.I.C. staff orchestrated 
with the role with the tapes of Ms. Lewinsky on January 13, 1998 raise 
very serious questions about the conduct of the Starr investigation. 
People who are familiar with this say they think it will be unlikely 
janeth Reno will release this information but clearly the White House 
seeks fertile ground. Clearly, tonight the president in the crowd 
shaking hands looking like there's no problems at all. He also got 
bad personnel news in a month of high-profile demartchurs. The one 
man near him that turned it to a corporate atmosphere from community 
college is now leading. This is not any surprise. Erskine Bowles will 
be leaving soon as well his senior advisor, ram Emanuel. And Mike 
McCurry had his last day last week, three important men to the president. 
It's not a surprise and their departure on the part of all three had 
been all planned. All had hoped to leave earlier but were hanging 
on to see if th could stick it out perhaps through the end and it 
obviously became clear that wasn't going to be possible. It's going 
to be tough, obviously for those two, Erskine Bowles and Rahm Emanuel 
to be replaced. Again, not a surprise. They hope they'll be able to 
get on and find replacements. Incrementally, it was an historic night 
and this story took a serious turn this evening. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>