<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981005.2100.0703 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Our next two guests this evening took part in today's lengthy hearings 
on Capitol Hill having both wrapped up just tonight, both serve on 
the house Judiciary committee. They are, congressman Bob Inglis, republican 
from South Carolina, congressman Steve Rothman, democrat from New 
Jersey. Both are with us tonight from Washington. Congressman Inglis, 
I'd like to begin with you. What happens next? Of course, we expect 
the full house to approve this resolution sometime later this week 
and then the committee will take up hearings in this inquiry probably 
some between now and ection day November 3. but I would imagine the 
bulk of it being after November 3. So the committee stays -- remains 
extent. In Watergate, we had the select committee, this committee 
would be the deif he can toe impeachment committee? That's right. 
It will be the full committee of the house Judiciary committee. It's 
how it should be. We'll have a great deal of work to do because this 
is a serious matter that requires some attention. Why don't you stay 
at work on it, why the break? Well, I think there will be work going 
on between the adjournment at the end of this week and the November 
3e lks, -- 3 election. But most of the work will occur after November 
3. it will take some time for the staff to prepare for hearings and 
that sort of thing. So that break will give us time for those kind 
of preparations. Congressman Rothman, I don't mean to sound flip but 
I imagine you now know what it feels like about your republican friends 
who were in the minority for so long watching votes go down repeatedly 
on straight party line votes? Today wasn't a total loss. There were 
good things that happened on the committee. The atmosphere was different, 
more nonpartisan if you will although not entirely. There was a lot 
of good will even though we disagreed. I was glad about two things, 
the republican majority agreed to adopt the rodino procedures whereby 
the democrats will have the right to subpoena witnesses. Mr. rodino 
gave that right to the republican minority. I was pleased that the 
republican chairman, Mr. Hyde agreed with us to try to complete the 
inquiry before the end of the year. The thing that was most disturbing 
to the democrats, and I think many people in the country was that 
the republican majority chose not to limit the inquiry to the 11 allegations 
raised by Mr. Starr regarding Ms. lensky but make it an open-ended 
inquiry. How could it be viewed of anything less than a total loss 
at the end of the day when you look at the language of what you just 
sent to the full house? What I just said, chairman Hyde says he pledges 
to get this over with at the end of the year, I believe he'll make 
a good faith effort when he adopted the procedures that Mr. rodino 
adopted which allowed us to get documents. That's important. They 
heard the democrats say, Mr. Starr came to the Congress about 11 allegations 
of misconduct all about miss Lewinsky and the president. Let's resolve 
those lieu lie allegations sooner than later. However it goes, let 
the chips fall where they may. The president did engage in morally 
wrong conduct. Let's decide if the punishment should require his remufle 
of office. Do his offenses rise to the level of treason, bribery, 
and other high crimes and misdemeanors? Does this mean for the people 
just tuning in tonight or just tuning in seriously to this story. 
Does this mean we'll see a parade of witnesses and fact finding? Will 
the Starr report be taken as all but fact but will you go back over 
already plowed ground? I think it's important for the committee to 
look at all the evidence before us and to test it, to push on it a 
little bit. To have witnesses come before us and see if we find their 
testimony credible. We can't just assume the facts in the Starr report. 
We must conduct a full review ourselves. And that's what, I think, 
good came out of today that there was agreement, really, on both sides 
of the aisle that there should be an inquiry. Our view was that that 
should be unlimited in scope and time. The view of the democrats on 
the committee was that we should limit the scope in time. You say 
witnesses, you mean Clinton and Lewinsky witnesses? I think that certainly 
miss Lewinsky would be a likely witness, I would think, and the president 
would be welcome, I believe, before the committee if he chooses to 
do that. Of course, you've got to keep in mind that what we're doing 
here in the committee on the house side is not a full-blown trial. 
What we must decide is if there's probable cause that there were crimes 
committed here, and if so, the matter is turned over to the Senate 
for a trial after impeachment in the full house. So it's not that 
we're going to conduct a trial, but we do want to push on that evidence 
a little bit to ensure ourselves that it is credible information. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>