<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981005.2100.1177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are back continuing our discussion with members of the house Judiciary 
committee, two men who have put in a full day. Congressman Bob Inglis, 
South Carolina, and congressman Rothman from New Jersey. Why S this 
turned so rigid? What is permitting you as a member of Congress and 
a member of this committee from picking up the phone and inviting 
Ken Starr down to you even in executive session and asking him, where 
are you in this thing, do you have anymore, help us out because we're 
both on the same page. It's not so rigid, we've asked Ken Starr to 
present us with whatever else he has hanging around if he has anything 
else. Many of us were surprised after 4 1/2 years, Mr. Starr only 
presented allegations regarding miss Lewinsky. Nothing about Whitewater, 
travelgate or filegate. We didn't know why. We had to assume he didn't 
have sufficient or credible evidence that would require the president 
-- or say that the president might be impeached because of those matters. 
And so if he comes up with them now, we're kind of wondering what 
we waited for and why he didn't present them all at the same time. 
Was he waiting until he got closer to election day, could that be 
it? We don't know. But in any event, the democrats and some republicans 
on the committee have asked chairman Hyde to ask Mr. Starr, if you've 
got anything else, bring it to us now so we can consider everything 
together. Congressman Inglis, you know Mr. Conyers has made noise 
about subpoenaing Ken Starr. What would be the problem with that? 
First of all, I would agree with Steve that we do want to know anything 
that Ken Starr's got because it would be better to take it all up 
at once instead of going through this and moving on to another part 
of it. Aso subpoenaing Mr. Starr and having him come before the committee, 
one of the things we want to do is make sure this doesn't become an 
investigation of the investigator. That may be warranted. If so, it's 
warranted outside of this procedure. It's warranted as something that 
janeth Reno may want to take up or the three-judge panel that authorized 
Ken Starr to do his work. Devil's advocate -- They may want to take 
it up. Devil's advocate. Is it as germane to your work as anything 
else. What if there's entrapment, what if there's an ax that's been 
alleged. Why isn't that a part your work? If that's specifically a 
response or a defense put forward by the president, then that would 
be germane. But as to the cousket an investigation -- conduct of an 
investigation, there's a reason for that. It deals with janeth Reno 
and the three-judge panel and also the reauthorization of the independent 
counsel. It needs fine tuning and work. When it was reauthorized in 
1993, there was an awareness that there wasn't all that perfect of 
a statute. Some work needs to be done but not part of this proceduring, 
necessarily. This has to do with the potential the president committed 
crimes, high crimes and misdemeanors that may warrant impeachment. 
Congressman Rothman, we have 15 second. How bad are the def.E.C.S 
going to be among -- defections going to be in the full house? I don't 
know. I think democrats, republicans, and independents alike we want 
the process to proceed fairly and in a nonpartisan way. I'm pleased 
chairman Hyde said he wants to get the 11 allegations in the Lewinsky 
matter over with by the end of this year. The American people are 
ready for us to resolve this. Does the president conduct require his 
removal from office or perhaps as a Lesser punishment more appropriate? 
Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>