<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981005.1830.0821 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- "living longer, living better." New hope for 
stroke victims. Until now, little could be done for those who suffer 
that the speech difficults and distorted facial expressions. Each 
year 700,000 Americans are hit with strokes. More than that die an 
ewly. But more than 4 million have survived, living with disabilities. 
But now, an experimental treatment could turn their lives around. 
NBC's Robert Bazell "in depth" tonight, on "living longer, living 
better." 67-year-old Don Fitch is about to become part of an ambitious 
experiment that could undo the damage done by a stroke. Hold your 
good arm up. Open and close your hand. At the University of Pittsburgh 
medical center, human nerve cells will be transplanted into Fitch's 
brain to replace the neurons destroyed by the stroke. Minutes before 
the operation begins, Dr. Douglas kondziolka shoots a video. The procedure 
is so new, the doctor will use the tape to compare the patient's condition 
before and after. Say, "today is a nice day." Today is a nice day. 
The stroke three and a half years ago paralyzed Fitch's left arm, 
made walking difficult, and even smiling, impossible. If I get my 
arm back, even if I don't have much strength, I can surely be able 
to fix breakfast again. And boy, I just enjoy doing that. The aim 
is to restore the massaging and signalling ability in the small area 
of the brain damaged by the stroke. Around the stroke area, there 
is regional brain that is still viable. It's just perhaps not working 
very well. It's not helping the arm or leg move. And so by putting 
these cells in, we're trying to create a better environment for recovery. 
The transplant is relatively simple. A special frame will help surgeons 
guide the injection of the neurons, which are grown in laboratory 
dishes, to the precise area of the stroke. Next, a cat scan of Fitch's 
brain. This dark area is the damage caused by the stroke. You can 
see on this side of the brain there is no such damage. The surgeons 
map the operation. So these are going to be the injection sites one 
here, two here and three here. It will take only a few minutes for 
the surgeons to inject the cells into Fitch's brain. How you doing, 
Don? He is awake during the procedure. Two hours later, Fitch feels 
fine. I know it's going to be a little bit of time, but I believe 
that in a couple of months, I'll get to move. I really believe it. 
Don Fitch is only the fourth person to receive the brain cell transplant. 
While the procedure works in animals with strokes, surgeons say it 
will be months before they know if it works for Fitch and the others. 
If it does, it could lead to the first treatment for some of the million 
Americans disabled by strokes, helping them live longer and better. 
Robert Bazell, NBC news. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>