<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite evidence to the contrary, London fashion isn't all about fun 
and games. There are also some real, wearable clothes coming from 
designers here. Take Hussein Chalayan, a Turkish Cypriot who is known 
for making political statements with his clothing, like putting models 
into chadors, pinning their arms to their sides or sealing their lips 
with photographers' gel to represent the repression of women. For 
his spring 1999 show, he chose to deal with humanity's interaction 
with nature. He called his show ``Geotropics,'' though how the clothes 
fitted the theme was not always obvious. The setting on the night 
of Sept. 28 was stylized, with a choir called the Joyful Company of 
Singers clad in white jump suits like the coveralls worn by technicians 
cleaning up toxic waste. As the choir sang, chanted, mumbled and keened 
a cappella, Chalayan presented a collection of spare, modern clothes 
that just about any woman would feel comfortable in. Mainly shift 
dresses and suits, the styles went a degree or two beyond minimalism. 
A collarless jacket might have a stiff square of fabric forming an 
angular upright collar behind the neck. Another might have a double 
arc forming an asymmetrical lapel. A slit or sheer strip might slice 
down one side of a dress. Subtly decorative touches included white 
top stitching on blue, wavy gray lines on black, origami folds or 
flat pleats on sheer white organza. Of actual colors there were almost 
none save for a faded denim blue and the palest mint green. There 
were a few eccentric touches, like what looked like upside-down camisoles 
attached to and hanging down from knit dresses, or geometrical plastic 
headgear on silk dresses that were half striped and half solid gray. 
And then there was a chair worn as a jacket with the arms as sleeves, 
the back as a collar and the seat as the back. But those aberrations 
aside, Chalayan offered an intelligent way for women to dress as the 
millennium approaches. Although the clothes looked nothing like Courreges' 
space-age uniforms of the 1960s, they could well be considered a vision 
of the future for the '90s generation. A bit more feminine, yet equally 
sleek and pure. The venerable British house of Burberry has been reinvented 
under the leadership of Rose Marie Bravo, the American retailer who 
was formerly the president of Saks Fifth Avenue and before that the 
chairman of I. Magnin. The hip young collection shown in the company's 
Haymarket headquarters was designed by Roberto Menichetti, an Italian 
who grew up in his family's fabric mills and who once worked for Jil 
Sander. Menichetti's main achievement was to take Burberry classics 
like the trench coat, the safari jacket and, of course, the signature 
plaid and give them a new twist. The trench coat has not only lost 
extraneous epaulets, tabs, pockets and buttons, but also sometimes 
turns up as a narrow double dress with a hidden closure. The plaid, 
instead of being reserved for linings and such, becomes an ankle-length 
dress worn under a shorter gauze dress. The kilt, without pleats, 
is streamlined, and the blazer is cut as small and close to the body 
as a sweater. The leather motorcycle jacket, in Menichetti's hands, 
loses its hard edge, rendered the color of caramel and treated until 
it is just as smooth and silky. Elsewhere in the collection, linens 
that have been woven on antique looms are given an interesting texture, 
and canvas is softened with a coating of voile. Colors are mainly 
neutrals, with a hint of the blue and lavender of a sunset sky and 
with the addition of a yellow adapted from a pair of the duke of Windsor's 
trousers and eminently more suitable to women's wear. With this collection, 
Burberry becomes a fashion name to reckon with. Matthew Williamson, 
just two years in business, has already established himself as a designer 
of choice for young women who want to look feminine and pretty yet 
sexy in the evening. Flowers _ hand-painted, embroidered or beaded 
_ decorate silks and even a strapless paper dress. Williamson showed 
capri pants worn with sequined tube tops or satin Chinese jackets. 
Asymmetrical hemlines are sometimes sliced up to the waist on one 
side and allowed to fall to below the knee or to the floor on the 
other. These clothes are definitely for someone who likes to show 
lots of leg and lots of skin. White is the basic color, with exuberant 
flashes of pink, orange, fuchsia and royal blue. Williamson isn't 
blazing any new fashion trails, but he is carving out a place for 
himself. Andrew Groves, who will probably always be known as the designer 
who stuffed a model's bodice with flies, is still trying hard to be 
noticed. His show opened with a laser beam igniting a line of fire 
down the sand-covered runway, followed by two models wearing false 
faces. From time to time, a man wearing a tiny hat perched on the 
side of his head would appear, but essentially there was precious 
little that was new. Groves blatantly adapted the ideas of other designers, 
showing versions of Alexander McQueen's frock coats over bare skin 
and even McQueen's buttocks-revealing pants. Groves draped a jacket 
with multi-strand chains, echoing a motif of Chalayan's 1997 show. 
And the wide-leg pants with a skirt back were just too gimicky. But 
this is only Groves' third show, and he may yet develop a style of 
his own. This London season offered the fashion flock a mixture of 
madness and sanity, originality and banality, but it's the excitement 
of shows like Chalayan's and, earlier, McQueen's, and the hope of 
discovering a new talent comparable to theirs, that will no doubt 
keep the fashion faithful returning. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>