<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Doctors routinely advise women to refrain from sexual activity for 
several weeks after childbirth, and for most women postpartum pain 
and exhaustion are incentives enough to comply. But for those who 
do not follow doctors' orders, the consequences can be serious and, 
in rare cases, even fatal. In the current issue of The Postgraduate 
Medical Journal, a publication of the British Medical Association, 
doctors describe two young women who died while having intercourse 
within eight days of giving birth. Both had had normal vaginal deliveries 
and died of air embolisms, air bubbles in the major arteries to the 
heart and brain. Death during intercourse is rare and occurs mainly 
in middle-aged men with heart disease, said Dr. Philip Batman, the 
lead author, who is a pathologist at Bradford Hospitals National Health 
Service Trust in Bradford, England. What led him to investigate such 
deaths in pregnant women and new mothers, he said, ``was the coincidence 
of seeing two women in the same small town in Yorkshire die of embolisms 
during intercourse in the last three years.'' He said women were more 
vulnerable to air embolisms soon after childbirth than at other times, 
because air forced into the uterus during sex can enter the bloodstream 
through blood vessels that were torn during delivery. Earlier research 
found that pregnant women are also at increased risk because air can 
become trapped between the sac containing the fetus and the uterus 
wall, then escape through blood vessels on the surface of the uterus. 
In reviewing the records of more than 20 million pregnant women from 
1967 to 1993, Batman and colleagues found that 18 had died from air 
embolisms during pregnancy or soon after childbirth. At least four 
of these women died while having sex, though Batman said they could 
not determine the exact number. One of the four had taken amphetamines, 
which could have contributed to her death, he said. Though there are 
no statistics on maternal deaths during sex in the United States, 
there are a handful of recent reports in the medical literature, all 
involving pregnant women. But since the risk is extremely slim, most 
doctors sanction intercourse during pregnancy, said Dr. Sharon Phelan, 
a spokeswoman for the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
and an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University 
of Alabama School of Medicine in Birmingham. ``The only time a doctor 
might tell a woman not to have intercourse is if she's had a number 
of preterm births,'' she said, explaining that intercourse can touch 
off contractions and then premature labor. Doctors used to recommend 
that women avoid sex for six weeks after childbirth, but the rules 
have been relaxed in recent years with the realization that six weeks 
is an arbitrary time frame and that many women probably disregard 
the advice anyway, said Dr. Joshua Copel, chief of the high-risk obstetrics 
group at the Yale School of Medicine. Literature from the American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists states that women can usually 
have sexual intercourse ``in about three or four weeks,'' or when 
they feel comfortable, a sign that the uterus has healed. Obstetricians 
say that it also takes about this long for incisions outside the vagina 
or from a Caesarean section to heal. The biggest risks of having sex 
too soon are not fatal complications but tears in the incisions or 
infections in the uterus caused by bacteria on the sperm, doctors 
say. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>