<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0238 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While most of the United States appears headed for a second consecutive 
year with a record number of tourists in 1998 _ or was before the 
recent stock market gyrations raised questions about rosy tourism 
projections for this fall _ Hawaii's tourist industry continues to 
struggle. The islands' overall visitor count of 3,974,530 through 
July, the latest month for which figures are available, is off almost 
1 percent over the same period last year, and with the traditional 
tourism slowdown this month, there is little prospect that the islands 
will come close to the record of almost 7 million visitors in 1990. 
Meanwhile, the hotel occupancy rate in August dropped to 75.8 percent 
statewide, a 3.6 percent decline from August 1997, while Waikiki hotel 
occupancy fell 3.82 percent in the same period, to 78.9. This on-again, 
off-again slump, during a time when tourism has been flourishing on 
the mainland, has renewed questions of whether Hawaii is mired in 
a prolonged though temporary downturn or whether its problems are 
systemic. What makes the soul-searching so important is that the $11 
billion in tourism revenues account for one-quarter of Hawaii's tax 
revenues, as well as one-third of the jobs in a no-growth state that 
is struggling with above-average unemployment. Hawaii's tourism woes 
began in earnest with the Gulf War in 1991. While that scare cut international 
air travel drastically, diminishing numbers of passengers on U.S. 
airlines by 44 percent on trans-Atlantic routes and 20 percent on 
Pacific routes, according to the Air Transport Association, it had 
a longer-lasting impact on Hawaii. Those islands lost about 850,000 
visitors from 1991 through 1993, mainly because they were so heavily 
dependent on Japanese tourists, who tend to be cautious travelers, 
according to Japanese tour operators. When tourists finally began 
venturing back in 1994, many complained that hotels were expensive 
and rundown, and that Honolulu lacked amusement parks and similar 
attractions. At the same time environmentalists faulted the state 
for not doing more to promote nature and environmental tourism. Hawaii's 
high prices put it at a competitive disadvantage with ocean cruises 
and mainland vacation sites. The American Automobile Association recently 
listed Hawaii as the most expensive place to vacation in America _ 
the $383-a-day average for meals and lodging was $53 a day more than 
in the runner-up, New York City. That may help explain why Hawaii, 
at one time almost every American's dream vacation destination, finished 
behind Florida and California in recent Travel Industry Association 
surveys of the favorite summer and winter destinations for Americans. 
While all this was going on, the decades-long honeymoon between Hawaii 
and its once-lucrative Asian market was battered by the Asian economic 
flu that has weakened Japanese and Korean currencies in the past year, 
effectively pushing up the price of everything on the islands for 
many Asian visitors. As a result, tourism from Asia is down 8.5 percent 
through July, and a number of airlines have canceled flights from 
Asia to Hawaii and put smaller planes on their remaining Hawaiian 
routes. This year occupancy in the beachfront hotels of Waikiki plunged 
to its lowest May occupancy since 1982 _ to 70.8 percent from 76.9 
percent a year earlier, according to PKF-Hawaii, a consulting firm, 
and from January through August occupancy at those hotels was down 
4.2 percent. Also in August, a strong month for visitors, Oahu occupancy 
plummeted four percentage points to 77.4, Oahu's lowest August rate 
since 1979. One result, which is now contributing to the problem, 
is that few hotels, especially the hotels on Waikiki beach, have been 
refurbished or renovated, according to Ernest A. Watari, chief executive 
officer of PKF-Hawaii. While acknowledging problems, optimists point 
to Hawaii's many pluses. Once the Asian crisis passes, they say, Japanese 
and Koreans will return in big numbers. Meanwhile, in hopes of attracting 
many of the 2.6 million Chinese tourists who went abroad last year, 
the Hawaii Convention and Visitors Bureau opened a sales office in 
Shanghai last April. And Honolulu's $350 million convention center, 
which opened in mid-June, has already booked 60 conventions over the 
next few years that are expected to account for almost 600,000 room 
nights and add $1.6 billion to the state's economy. In addition, tour 
operators, including Globus, Cosmos, Tauck, Collette, Pleasant Holidays, 
Perillo and Gogo Worldwide, currently have special rates to Hawaii, 
while Liberty Travel and some other big travel agencies offer package 
deals featuring room and car upgrades. In addition, such hotel chains 
as Castle, Sheraton, Aston and Outrigger also have special rates through 
this year. Even as the number of Asian visitors dwindles, visitors 
from the mainland are increasing _ up 4.8 percent through this July 
to 1.78 million. Christopher Kam, a researcher with the Hawaii Visitors 
and Convention Bureau, said the major factor appears to have been 
``the overall strength of the U.S. economy.'' Which explains why Hawaiians 
are keeping their fingers crossed and their eyes on Wall Street and 
the national economic indicators. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>