<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0241 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Combining technology with fantasy, the United States is about to send 
an experimental probe into space to test some of the favorite concepts 
of science fiction. The robot craft not only will be driven by an 
advanced ion propulsion engine, it will also take care of itself, 
navigating through space on its own and occasionally calling home 
to let people on Earth know how it is doing. The spacecraft, called 
Deep Space 1, is to be a testbed for new technologies that may be 
incorporated into the next generation of probes sent to explore the 
solar system and beyond in the next century. Engineers at the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration say the mission, which could 
be launched as early as Oct. 15., is one of the first designed to 
send a spacecraft away from the Earth with technology-testing, and 
not science, as the main objective. Dr. Wesley Huntress, NASA's associate 
administrator for space science, said Deep Space 1 was part of a new 
program to examine and validate unusual technologies that could be 
used to produce more efficient, cheaper scientific spacecraft. Those 
planning science missions are sometimes reluctant to risk trying promising, 
but untested, new technologies or approaches, he said. High-risk, 
but relatively low-cost, missions like Deep Space 1 should give planners 
more confidence in trying some of these new ideas in their projects, 
Huntress said. Appropriately, this harbinger of the future space program 
comes on the heels of NASA's 40th anniversary, which was celebrated 
last week. Deep Space 1, a 1,000-pound craft crammed with miniature 
instruments and devices, is to test 12 innovative technologies in 
its first few months in space. Among the technologies aboard are an 
autonomous navigation system, a miniature integrated camera and imaging 
spectrometer, an integrated ion and electron spectrometer, advanced 
software with artificial intelligence that lets the spacecraft help 
run its own mission as situations change, and a variety of new, low-power 
electronics. If all goes well, Deep Space 1's primary mission will 
culminate in July when the craft makes a very close flyby of a small 
asteroid called 1992 KD. Afterward, if the spacecraft is healthy and 
NASA chooses to extend the mission, the probe will fly on to visit 
a dying comet known as Wilson-Harrington in January 2001. After that 
encounter, the craft could visit the comet Borrelly, one of the most 
active to regularly visit the inner solar system, in September 2001. 
The mission is expected to cost $152 million, including $42 million 
for the conventional rocket used to fire the spacecraft away from 
Earth, project officials said. But most of the attention being paid 
to Deep Space 1 is focusing on its solar-electric propulsion system, 
a variation on the concept of ion drive that has been a mainstay of 
science fiction for decades. While ion propulsion units have been 
tested in space before, and small ion engines have recently been used 
to stabilize communications satellites in high Earth orbits, the new 
mission will mark the first time that this type of engine will be 
used as the primary drive system for a spacecraft. ``I first heard 
of ion propulsion in 1968 during a Star Trek episode,'' said Dr. Marc 
Rayman of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., the 
chief mission engineer for Deep Space 1. An ion engine uses fuel 10 
times more efficiently than conventional rockets, he said, but it 
produces an almost imperceptible amount of thrust. This type of engine 
works by letting it fire continuously for months or years, gradually 
adding momentum to a spacecraft in the vacuum of space, instead of 
burning all of its fuel in a few minutes at high thrust, as conventional 
rockets do. ``Ion propulsion is acceleration with patience,'' Rayman 
said. Deep Space 1 will be sent on its way from Cape Canaveral, Fla., 
boosted by a three-stage Delta rocket. Between two and four weeks 
after launching, engineers will begin testing the ion drive, running 
it for a 10-day period that will be interrupted every other day for 
navigation tests. After the shakedown period and a couple of weeks 
to evaluate the results, the engine will be switched on for long-term 
thrusting that may continue for several months. John Stocky, manager 
of propulsion technology at the Pasadena laboratory, which is managed 
by the California Institute of Technology, said the craft would have 
186 pounds of xenon gas aboard to fuel the engine, ample supplies 
for the primary and extended missions. The xenon, a heavy, inert gas, 
will not be burned like conventional rocket fuel, but charged electrically 
to create high-speed particles that leave the engine so fast that 
they produce thrust. ``We are trying to turn into fact today what 
was science fiction yesterday,'' Stocky said. When the ion engine 
is running, he said, xenon is injected into a chamber and bombarded 
with high-speed, negatively charged electrons produced by heating 
a barium-calcium-aluminate material carried in tanks near the engine. 
These electrons, guided by magnetic rings around the chamber, hit 
the xenon atoms, knocking away one of the 54 electrons orbiting each 
atom's nucleus. The resulting atoms, with a net positive charge, are 
known as an ions. At the end of the chamber, which opens into space, 
are two metal grids made of molybdenum grids that are charged positively 
and negatively, respectively. The charges in the grids create an electrostatic 
pull on the xenon ions, accelerating them out of the engine and into 
space at more than 62,000 miles per hour, producing 3,000 tiny beams 
of thrust. Stocky said it was important to keep the engine chamber 
and the rest of the spacecraft electrically neutral by keeping the 
ions moving away. If a charge builds up in the spacecraft from the 
escaping plume, ions leaving the chamber might come back and negate 
any thrust. So an electrode at the rear of the engine shoots electrons 
into the glowing blue ion stream leaving the grids, replacing missing 
electrons and neutralizing the electrical charge of the escaping xenon. 
The engine on Deep Space 1 should produce about one-250th of a pound 
of thrust, Stocky said, comparable to the force exerted by a single 
sheet of typing paper resting on the palm of a person's hand. But 
this steady thrust increases the speed of the spacecraft by about 
30 feet per second each day, enough to increase Deep Space 1's speed 
over the life of the primary mission by 8,000 mph, engineers said. 
At times, the ion engine will be turned off and the spacecraft will 
coast, engineers said. The spacecraft will stop the engine once a 
week to take its bearings and send routine signals to Earth, they 
said, and it also will remain off for periods of months in an extended 
mission when extra energy is not needed as it shapes its orbit around 
the Sun. To provide the electrical power to run the engine, Deep Space 
1 will use a new type of solar power array never before flown in space 
that concentrates and focuses sunlight onto 3,600 electricity-producing 
solar cells. The craft will have a pair of solar wings that expand 
to 38.6 feet across when fully extended and these arrays will produce 
15 to 20 percent more power than similar devices the same size. Atop 
the solar cells sit 720 cylindrical lenses made of silicone. The lenses, 
which look like glass cylinders cut down the middle, gather incoming 
sunlight on the rounded outer surfaces and focus it down to the solar 
cells below the flat sides of the half-cylinders. Development of the 
arrays is co-sponsored by the Pentagon's Ballistic Missile Defense 
Organization. Previous unmanned space missions have required ground 
controllers to constantly monitor conditions on the spacecraft and 
provide navigational information to keep them on course. Rayman said 
Deep Space 1 would require fewer than a dozen controllers on Earth, 
instead of the hundreds needed for some previous missions, because 
it would keep track of itself. About once a week, the spacecraft will 
take pictures of stars with asteroids in the background and use this 
information to navigate itself, including having the ability to adjust 
its course and decide how close it will come to the asteroid and comets 
it targets. ``Using stars and asteroids as reference points, the spacecraft 
takes pictures of the sky and infers where it is and where it wants 
to go,'' Rayman said. Instead of constantly sending information on 
its condition to Earth, the craft will occasionally send special signal 
tones that signify different states of well-being. The tones range 
from ``everything is operating acceptably'' to ``there is a problem 
that may require help if it worsens'' to ``need urgent assistance 
from the ground.'' All the technologies of Deep Space 1 combine to 
point to an entirely new way of designing and operating robotic scientific 
missions away from Earth, Rayman said. ``It's like having one's car 
find its own way from Los Angeles to Washington, D.C., and park itself 
within one foot of its destination, all the while getting 300 miles 
to the gallon of fuel,'' he said. ``This has the potential to change 
everything.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>