<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0477 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Scouting report on the American League Championship series. CLEVELAND: 
89-73, AL Central champion NEW YORK: 114-48, AL East champion Season 
series: Yankees won 7 of 11 They beat Texas because of their pitching, 
holding the Rangers to a .141 batting average and one run in three 
games. Lest there be any doubt, David Wells established himself as 
one of the best big-game pitchers in baseball with his eight shutout 
innings in Game 1; he is now 5-0 in the post season. Andy Pettitte, 
the Game 3 starter, has rebounded - he is relying more on his sinking 
fastball and his breaking ball than his cut fastball - and he seems 
to benefit from following Wells in the rotation. David Cone, the Game 
2 starter, must work hard to keep Kenny Lofton off base, for holding 
runners is the poorest aspect of Cone's approach. The energetic Orlando 
Hernandez has not pitched since Sept. 25 and might be over-eager when 
he starts Game 4. The bottom of the Yankees' lineup carried the attack 
against Texas: Scott Brosius driving in three runs and Shane Spencer 
hitting two home runs and driving in four runs, Joe Girardi collecting 
three hits in seven at-bats. The first five hitters on the Yankees' 
lineup generally did not produce as they usually do (Bernie Williams 
seems to be having trouble handling high fastballs once again). A 
scout trailing the Yankees in the last week said Spencer is so comfortable 
at the plate it is only a matter of time before a pitcher tries knocking 
him down. The Yankees' defense is the best in the American League, 
with two question marks _ Spencer is adequate in left field but sometimes 
is fooled on fly balls, and time will tell if Brosius' sprained left 
ankle will affect his range at third base, particularly on bunt plays. 
Sandy Alomar is a good catcher capable of throwing out runners, but 
the Yankees should be extremely active on the basepaths in this series, 
trying to go from first to third or first to home. The Cleveland infielders 
who relay throws, Omar Vizquel and Joey Cora, have poor arms. Cleveland 
Manager Mike Hargrove likes bringing in left-hander Paul Assenmacher 
to face Paul O'Neill in crucial situations, and with great success 
in the past: O'Neill has 3 hits in 24 times at-bat in his career against 
Assenmacher, with 10 strikeouts. But left-handed batters have hit 
Assenmacher hard this year, batting .313. The Indians' rotation is 
deep in bodies, but nobody really knows how good they will be until 
they take the mound. Bartolo Colon, the Game 3 starter, shut down 
the Yankees on June 21, but he pitched badly in the second half of 
the year, the opponents' batting average jumping from .216 to .321. 
Jaret Wright, the Game 1 starter, can be great, but if he can't get 
his curveball over, he can get ripped. Charles Nagy pitched well down 
the stretch to finish 15-10, beating the Yankees in the final week 
of the season. Mike Jackson is a better closer than Jos Mesa was, 
and more fearless, but the Indians' left-handed set-up man, Paul Assenmacher, 
has not been dominant this year, and right-handed set-up man Paul 
Shuey is prone to control trouble. The Indians are a lot like the 
Yankees _ a deep team with some speed and many offensive weapons. 
Manny Ramirez slugged 45 home runs, Kenny Lofton swiped 54 bases and 
scored 101 runs, David Justice can hit any good pitcher on any given 
day and before Jim Thome was hurt, he was a most valuable player candidate. 
In some respects, however, the most prominent threats to the Yankees 
are Omar Vizquel and Joey Cora, two pesky hitters who can drive the 
offense if they find a way on base. The Indians are very, very good 
in some spots, from the catcher Sandy Alomar to the center-fielder 
Kenny Lofton, to the extraordinary hands of Vizquel at shortstop. 
But second baseman Joey Cora is terrible and the right- fielder Ramirez 
has the potential to be terrible. The Indians will be able to put 
pressure on the Yankees with speed at the top and bottom of the lineup. 
Lofton swiped 54 bases, and Vizquel 37, and they should challenge 
David Cone in Game 2 and David Wells and Andy Pettitte from second 
base in Games 1 and 3. The Indians acquired the second baseman Cora 
because of his great success against Yankees pitchers such as Wells 
(5 for 10 this year) and Pettitte (4 for 7 this year). But Cora's 
defense could kill the Indians, if he is tested. Playing him is a 
calculated risk. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>