<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's that no-time-in-the-morning time of year again. The kids are 
back in school, parents are back to work and breakfast in many households 
has become a catch-as-catch-can affair, if it is eaten at all. This 
decade has seen a steady decline in the proportion of Americans who 
regularly eat breakfast, long considered ``the most important meal 
of the day.'' Though you may not think so as you hit the snooze alarm 
to catch a few more winks of morning sleep, it would pay to get up 
15 minutes earlier to make time for a nutritious breakfast. A sweet 
roll or bagel and coffee from a nearby deli is not an adequate breakfast. 
Nor is a so-called breakfast bar or Pop Tart or bag of chips munched 
on the way to school. These may temporarily suppress hunger pangs, 
but they will do little to enhance brain function and mood, not to 
mention nutritional status and overall health. Given what most Americans 
call breakfast, a fast-food sandwich is actually an improvement even 
though it is likely to be much higher in fat, salt and calories than, 
say, cereal with fruit and low-fat or skim milk. Countless studies 
in recent decades have documented the value of eating breakfast to 
a child's ability to learn, think quickly, pay attention and get along 
well with others. In a report last month in the Archives of Pediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine, Dr. J. Michael Murphy of Massachusetts General 
Hospital in Boston and his co-authors assessed the effects of eating 
school breakfast on the academic and emotional functioning of more 
than 100 children in inner-city elementary schools in Baltimore and 
Philadelphia. When school breakfast was made available to all children 
regardless of family income, the number of youngsters who ate it doubled, 
giving the researchers an opportunity to measure the results before 
and after. They found that those who often ate school breakfast got 
higher grades in math and were less likely to be described as depressed, 
anxious or hyperactive by parents or teachers. In addition to improving 
in these psychological dimensions, those youngsters who started eating 
breakfast under the universal feeding program improved their math 
grades, school attendance and punctuality. Children who regularly 
eat breakfast think faster and clearer, solve problems more easily 
and are less likely to be fidgety and irritable early in the day. 
Recent studies show that children who skip breakfast are not as adept 
at selecting the information they need to solve problems. Ability 
to recall and use new information, verbal fluency and attentiveness 
are hurt by hunger. Earlier studies showed similar effects of skipping 
breakfast among teen-agers and adults. Over all, breakfast skippers 
were less productive and handled tasks less efficiently than those 
who ate breakfast. Among both young and elderly adults, skipping breakfast 
impaired memory and mental performance. You don't have to be a scientist 
to realize that it is hard to concentrate on mental challenges and 
to maintain a pleasant, patient demeanor when your growling stomach 
signals a fall in blood glucose that follows an overnight fast or 
the consumption of only a sweet food or coffee or both. The brain 
runs on glucose, and when the supply runs low, it is forced to depend 
on stored fat, a less efficient source of fuel. Performance questions 
aside, the goal of many breakfast skippers is to save on calories. 
However, calories consumed early in the day are least likely to put 
on pounds, and skipping any meal simply increases the temptation to 
eat a high-calorie snack or overeat at the next meal. In fact, the 
leanest people tend to be those who eat three or more meals a day. 
Then there is the matter of nutrients. Breakfast may be the only time 
during the day when a child or adult consumes fruit juice and milk, 
making this meal an important source of vitamins C and D and calcium. 
Studies of teen-agers have shown that those who skip breakfast have 
an intake of calcium and vitamin C that is 40 percent lower and an 
iron intake that is 10 percent lower than those who eat breakfast. 
These nutrients are most critical during the years of growth and development. 
Further, given the demands of modern lives, breakfast may be the only 
meal teen-agers regularly eat at home and the only one over which 
parents might have some say. Ideally, breakfast should supply one-quarter 
to one-third of the day's protein plus fiber-rich complex carbohydrates 
and a small amount of fat. The breakfasts served in school generally 
strive to meet most, if not all, these nutrient needs. Simple homemade 
meals that fulfill these criteria include a whole-grain cereal (cold 
or hot) with fruit and low-fat or skim milk; low-fat or nonfat yogurt 
with fruit and whole-wheat bread with jam or margarine; a shake made 
with yogurt, fruit and skim milk plus whole-wheat toast, or a turkey, 
cheese or peanut butter sandwich on whole-grain bread with fruit juice 
and milk. Parents should provide a good example by eating breakfast 
themselves. Children are most likely to eat breakfast if someone eats 
with them. If that is not possible, at least try to sit with children 
while they eat. In families where mornings are already overly loaded 
with demands, it helps to set up breakfast the night before. When 
my sons were young and I had to get out early, I often made them sandwiches 
for breakfast or set up pita pizzas they could pop into the toaster 
oven in the morning. If the boys were running late, they could eat 
these foods on the way to school. But on most days, breakfast was 
eaten at home. Sometimes I cooked French toast or pancakes in advance 
to be heated in the morning and topped with sliced bananas or berries 
and yogurt. Another make-ahead favorite was ``Eggs Jane'' _ poached 
egg white and turkey on a whole-wheat pita topped with a slice of 
cheese, ready to heat in the toaster oven in the morning. Although 
hot cereal doesn't lend itself to advance preparation, it takes only 
two minutes (and no pots to wash) to cook quick oats with skim milk 
and raisins in the microwave oven. Of course, school-age children 
can serve themselves ready-to-eat breakfast cereal. But it is up to 
parents to assure that the selection of cereals in the house is nutritious. 
The best cereals are well-stocked with nutrients and fiber and not 
overly rich in sugars or fats. Don't be misled by claims that a serving 
supplies 100 percent of lots of vitamins and minerals, since there 
is no need for anyone to consume the day's nutrient needs at breakfast. 
Look instead for whole grain cereals with no more than 6 grams of 
sugar per serving. Among good choices that young taste buds are likely 
to enjoy are Wheaties, Cheerios, Wheat Chex and Raisin Bran, perhaps 
with a sweeter cereal like Life or granola as a garnish. And for those 
who can't bear to eat first thing in the morning, try a glass of juice 
and piece of bread before leaving home with a portable breakfast (like 
a container of yogurt or sandwich) to eat later when hunger strikes, 
often just before the school or work day starts. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>