<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0460 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Tuesday, Oct. 6: As the 
nine justices of the Supreme Court prepared to ascend the bench Monday, 
protesters outside the building were calling attention to a collective 
embarrassment. Of the 34 law clerks currently serving the justices, 
they complained, 22 are white men, 11 are white women and one is a 
Hispanic woman. There are no blacks among the group. It was a jarring, 
if fitting, beginning for a new and potentially important Supreme 
Court term in which issues of race, discrimination and political power 
will loom large, challenging the conservative-leaning court to reach 
for a new level of wisdom and sensitivity. Race is a subtext for the 
term's most politically charged case _ a challenge to the use of statistical 
sampling techniques needed to avoid the quadrennial undercounting 
of minorities and poor people in the 2000 census. House Republicans 
who brought the case are anxious to avoid increasing the political 
power of predominantly Democratic areas. The court's task is to insure 
a fair and accurate count. On the related subject of redistricting, 
the court has agreed to look again at a North Carolina congressional 
district it struck down two years ago as an unconstitutional racial 
gerrymander. Although the revised district is more compact and now 
has a majority of white voters, a lower court nonetheless ruled it 
invalid. The court needs to provide guidance on the degree to which 
legislators can take race into account in drawing district lines. 
Another closely watched civil rights case will decide whether collective 
bargaining agreements that provide for arbitration of conflicts bar 
individual lawsuits against an employer for discrimination. Disallowing 
such suits would weaken civil rights protection for many American 
workers. The court will also hear arguments on the validity of an 
anti-loitering law enacted by Chicago to combat street gangs. The 
aim is sound but, as a lower court aptly noted, applying previous 
Supreme Court rulings, the law is unconstitutionally vague and infringes 
on the basic freedom to be on the street and associate with others. 
A welfare case from California raises the question whether states 
can discriminate against newcomers by granting them lower benefits. 
There is no reason to depart from the court's principled 1969 ruling 
invalidating complete denial of welfare benefits to newcomers as violating 
the constitutional right to travel. Another California case concerns 
the right of a landowner to compensation for government limits on 
the use of his property. The outcome will offer a sign of how far 
the court's more conservative members intend to take their crusade 
to elevate individual property rights at the expense of the environment 
and the ability of localities to enforce reasonable zoning rules. 
Other important cases this term will test the court's willingness 
_ not strong in recent years _ to protect personal privacy against 
police incursions to search vehicles or peer through window blinds 
in the name of fighting crime. The court should not hesitate to say 
the Constitution does not condone the police's acting like Peeping 
Toms. Continuing an exploration of sexual harassment issues begun 
last term, the court has just agreed to decide the question of a school 
district's liability for harassment of a student by another student. 
It is hard to see how a school can avoid liability if it can be shown 
that school officials knew of the problem and refused to intervene. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>