<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0392 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Yankees worked out in near silence last Thursday after learning 
that Darryl Strawberry had been found to have colon cancer. But their 
mood had changed dramatically Monday as they prepared for the start 
of the American League Championship Series. Strawberry is faring well, 
according to teammates who visited him in the hospital on Sunday, 
and with his encouragement, they are focusing on the job at hand _ 
winning the final round of the playoffs, and then the World Series, 
and assuring the team's potentially lofty standing in history. The 
Yankees' David Wells will pitch against Cleveland's Jaret Wright at 
Yankee Stadium Tuesday night in Game 1 of the four-of-seven-game series. 
The Yankees swept the Texas Rangers in three games in the division 
series to advance to the ALCS, while the Indians beat the Boston Red 
Sox, three games to one. With one more victory, the Yankees will match 
the single-season record for combined victories in the regular season 
and post-season; with 117 victories, they are one short of the record 
set by the 1906 Cubs, who won 116 games in a 154-game regular season 
and two in the World Series. A small group of Yankees, including Manager 
Joe Torre and pitcher David Cone, visited Strawberry at Columbia-Presbyterian 
Medical Center here on Sunday night, chatting with him for about 30 
minutes. ``He was very alert,'' Torre said. ``He looked real good. 
I mean, he was sitting up, and of course the one complaint he had 
is that he is not going to be able to eat for a couple of days.'' 
Derek Jeter said, ``He looked great, he talked normally, everything 
you would expect from Straw.'' The Yankees intend to send small groups 
of players to see Strawberry each day, for small doses of conversation. 
Scott Brosius, the third baseman who sprained his ankle on Friday 
in Texas, stopped by Monday after undergoing a CAT scan that revealed 
no fractures. Brosius, who batted .400 with three runs batted in against 
the Rangers, worked out after the tests and said he was fine and ready 
to play. As of Monday night, the Yankees intended to add outfielder 
Ricky Ledee as their 25th man, rather than another third baseman, 
Mike Lowell. Ledee will probably be used as a late-inning pinch-runner 
and defensive replacement. ``There's no instability,'' Brosius said, 
``just a little bit of pain there.'' Brosius will probably bat ninth 
in Tuesday night's game, two spots behind the rookie left fielder 
Shane Spencer, who is becoming a fixture in the Yankees' post-season 
lineup. Tim Raines will bat sixth and start as the designated hitter, 
rather than Chili Davis _ probably because Raines is a little better 
at handling high fastballs, such as those thrown by Wright. Cleveland 
Manager Mike Hargrove and Wright tried to play down the ill will caused 
by Wright's two incidents with the Yankees this season _ when he broke 
Luis Sojo's hand with a pitch in spring training, in what Sojo believes 
was an intentional act, and when Wright hit Paul O'Neill with a pitch 
on June 19, prompting O'Neill to offer personal commentary on Wright 
as he walked to first base. ``Pitching inside is part of my game, 
and I'm not trying to hurt anybody or hit anybody,'' Wright said. 
But the bad feelings exist below the surface, and memories remain 
intact. Wells obliquely made reference Monday to others who ``headhunt,'' 
after mentioning how Sojo had his hand broken. The Yankees do not 
like the 22-year-old Wright, do not like what they perceive as his 
smugness, and though no one would say so for the record, they would 
love to score lots of runs against him. Wright pitched erratically 
this season, winning 12 and losing 10 and compiling a 4.72 earned 
run average. But he throws very hard, and on those days when he is 
able to get his curveball over the plate for strikes, he can be very 
difficult to hit. What the Yankees will try to do, Raines said, is 
make Wright throw strikes, make him pitch deep into counts. Wright 
averaged 17.44 pitches per inning this season, and the Yankees will 
want to drive up that count and drive him off the mound in the middle 
innings. Wells made one start against the Indians this season, beating 
them with eight solid innings on June 20, when he struck out nine 
and walked none while yielding eight hits and two runs in eight innings. 
Wells, 5-0 in the post-season, has shown he has a knack for pitching 
in big games. Wells remembers that when he was a junior at Point Loma 
High School, in San Diego, he started and lost a championship game 
and was angry about it for a year, then came back the next year to 
beat Sweetwater for the CIF-San Diego Section championship. ``I am 
not a follower, and I believe that I am a leader going out there and 
trying to set the tone,'' Wells said, ``especially if I get the ball 
first. I am not afraid to fail, and I hate to lose.'' The Yankees 
won 7 of 11 games against the Indians this season, including the last 
three meetings in the final week of the season, when both teams kept 
their best pitchers out of action to prevent the other side from getting 
one last look. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>