<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government announced Monday that it had sued two of the nation's 
biggest hospital companies, contending that they had defrauded federal 
health programs over more than 14 years through a huge scheme involving 
bogus expense claims. The suit, brought against Columbia/HCA Healthcare 
Corp. and Quorum Health Group in federal district court in Tampa, 
Fla., comes after years of investigation into allegations of fraud 
at the companies. It contends that the hospital giants routinely overstated 
expenses in reports to the government to increase their compensation 
from federal programs like Medicare. The Justice Department said in 
a statement that in addition to their corporate parents, more than 
200 hospitals in 37 states were defendants. Columbia owns some 320 
hospitals, while Quorum owns or operates about 250 hospitals. Also 
named in the suit was Healthtrust, a for-profit hospital chain now 
owned by Columbia, and Quorum Health Resources, a subsidiary of Quorum 
that is the country's largest manager of not-for-profit hospitals. 
The lawsuit was originally filed under seal in 1993 by one corporate 
whistle-blower. Under the federal statute governing such cases, the 
suit was then reviewed and investigated by the Justice Department, 
which filed its motion to join the litigation last week. For Columbia, 
the world's largest health care company, the lawsuit marks the first 
time since a series of government raids last year that federal officials 
have contended that the company itself engaged in a sweeping fraud 
scheme. The government had previously brought criminal charges against 
four Columbia executives who had been involved in the preparation 
of cost reports for one Florida hospital. Quorum, which has been under 
investigation since 1993 for possible irregularities in its cost reports, 
was part of the Hospital Corporation of America until the late 1980s. 
Columbia bought HCA in 1994. At issue in the litigation are the workings 
of a complex, little-understood part of modern hospitals known as 
the federal cost-reporting system, one that has meant billions of 
dollars in reimbursements by the government to hospitals and other 
health care providers over the years. Those reports generate hundreds 
of millions of dollars in payments each year to Columbia and Quorum 
alone. Through that system, portions of costs associated with patient 
care are reimbursed by programs like Medicare at different rates. 
But, in its suit, the government contends that the companies intentionally 
misrepresented costs to increase the reimbursement rate or receive 
payment for costs that were not eligible for reimbursement. Although 
the lawsuit does not specify the amount the government is seeking 
from the two companies, it says that through the scheme, federal health 
programs ``have been damaged in the amount of many millions of dollars.'' 
Analysts have estimated that Columbia may have to pay more than $1 
billion to settle the various fraud claims being investigated by the 
government, including the cost-reporting case. Much of the government's 
critical evidence in the case comes from secret, duplicate sets of 
cost reports and work sheets maintained at the hospitals that contained 
significantly lower expenses than those in reports submitted to the 
government, according to the suit. Much of that information was obtained 
by the government during a civil investigation into the two companies' 
cost-reporting practices. In an internal statement to its employees 
issued Monday, Columbia said that the issues raised in the suit were 
not new. But the statement added that the government action could 
well be an important step in bringing an end to the dispute. ``We 
anticipate that the government joining of this lawsuit will facilitate 
our ability to reach a resolution of these issues,'' the statement 
said. James Dalton, president and chief executive of Quorum, said 
in a statement Monday that the company had always strived to submit 
honest claims to the government. ``Throughout Quorum's existence, 
we have tried our very best to follow all the applicable rules,'' 
he said. ``Quorum is very proud of the rigorous honesty and the highest 
ethical values that we believe our people _ from management to all 
of our associates _ exhibit every day.'' The lawsuit was originally 
filed under seal by James Alderson, former chief financial officer 
of North Valley Hospital in Whitefish, Mont., which is managed by 
Quorum. Last week, the government filed its motion to join Alderson's 
suit. A statement issued by Phillips &AMP; Cohen, Alderson's lawyers, 
said that their client was ordered to file aggressive cost reports 
with the government and establish a second document called a ``reserve 
report.'' The second document, the statement says, contained accurate 
information about the true expenses. When Alderson refused to follow 
those instructions, the lawyers said in their statement, he was dismissed. 
Stephen Meagher, a lawyer for Alderson, said that his client was not 
available for comment. The case was brought under the False Claims 
Act, which allows whistle-blowers to file suit on behalf of the government. 
Under that Civil War-era law, the government can potentially recover 
three times any amount defrauded from a federal program. If the suit 
is successful, Alderson stands to receive as much as 25 percent of 
any amount recovered. Lawyers involved in the case said that the investigation 
had obtained large amounts of evidence proving the fraud and that 
the final claim against the companies could be huge. ``The evidence 
we have seen absolutely establishes systemic wrongdoing at Columbia,'' 
said Meagher. ``Given the size of reimbursement claims contained in 
the cost reports, the liability is potentially staggering.'' The 33-page 
complaint spells out a wide array of methods it contends were used 
to misrepresent costs and defraud federal health programs. Many of 
those methods have never previously been disclosed. For example, the 
suit says that the companies often misrepresented expenses in their 
reports that were unrelated to patient care _ and thus not reimbursable. 
The suit says that the companies included costs associated with marketing, 
physician recruitment and even hospital televisions. Each of those 
costs was misrepresented in the filed cost reports, according to the 
lawsuit, but were identified correctly in the second set of reports. 
In effect, the suit says, the companies were ``keeping two sets of 
books _ one for the as-filed cost report and one for the reserve report.'' 
Monday, shares of Quorum fell $1.50, to $13.50, while Columbia dropped 
31.25 cents, to $19.75. The shares of both companies touched their 
low price for the year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>