<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Adding an immigration case and five other new cases to the term that 
opened Monday, the Supreme Court agreed to clarify the law on leniency 
for refugees who seek to remain in the United States despite having 
committed crimes in their home countries. The justices accepted the 
Clinton administration's appeal of a ruling in favor of a Guatemalan 
who, as a student leader in Guatemala, had burned 10 buses and vandalized 
stores while demonstrating against the government. He had entered 
the United States illegally in 1993 and, when faced with deportation 
the next year, requested asylum and the ``withholding of deportation,'' 
a form of administrative relief granted by immigration officials in 
the name of the attorney general. Although an immigration judge granted 
his request, finding that he had established a ``well-founded fear'' 
of political reprisal in Guatemala, the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service appealed. The service argued that the man, Juan Anibal Aguirre-Aguirre, 
was ineligible for leniency, citing a provision of the immigration 
law that denies relief to an alien who has ``committed a serious nonpolitical 
crime outside the United States.'' An immigration appeals board agreed 
with the agency, but its ruling was overturned last year by the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit, in San Francisco. That court 
ruled that the Board of Immigration Appeals should not have simply 
applied the law automatically, but should have weighed a number of 
factors, including the seriousness of the offenses when balanced against 
the seriousness of the reprisals Aguirre faced, and the nature of 
the crime in proportion to the political situation and objectives. 
In its Supreme Court appeal, Immigration and Naturalization Service 
vs. Aguirre-Aguirre, No. 97-1754, the administration essentially takes 
the view that decisions of immigration officials on whether to proceed 
with deportation or grant administrative relief is not subject to 
second-guessing by the courts. The Court of Appeals ``failed to give 
due deference'' to the Board of Immigration Appeals and ``improperly 
substituted its judgment'' for that of the board, the administration 
told the justices. The court's reaction to these arguments could indicate 
how the justices will respond to other immigration cases now making 
their way through the courts in the wake of Congress' sharp curtailment 
two years ago of aliens' ability to challenge adverse administrative 
decisions. Several federal appeals courts have ruled in the past few 
months that immigration decisions cannot be completely insulated from 
judicial review and that, at least in certain circumstances, aliens 
must be given access to federal courts. Most recently, in a major 
ruling late last month, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 2nd Circuit, 
in New York, rejected the administration's view and ruled that Congress 
lacked authority to deprive federal courts of jurisdiction to hear 
habeas corpus petitions from immigrants who are in custody and who 
are challenging deportation orders. The six new cases the justices 
accepted on Monday brought to 51 the number now available for decision 
during the new term. The court denied review Monday in some 1,700 
cases that had accumulated since the last term ended in June. One 
unusual feature on Monday was the extent to which the justices undertook 
to reformulate the legal questions posed by the cases they agreed 
to take on. Typically, the court simply announces that review has 
been granted, presumably on the terms presented by the lawyer who 
brings the case. In the immigration case Monday, for example, the 
court simply said ``granted.'' But in the five other cases, the justices 
actually rewrote the questions, sharpening the focus and limiting 
their review to those questions that were logically interrelated. 
In one case, in which the lawyer offered a full page of what he described 
to the court as ``a cascading series of sub-issues,'' the justices 
boiled the matter down to two questions and six lines of type. Although 
it is too early in the term to tell whether the justices are taking 
a new and more aggressive approach to managing their docket, the action 
Monday may reflect their frustration with cases in recent terms in 
which the underlying issue was important but the presentation was 
too unfocused to let the court make much headway. Here are some of 
the highlights of the opening day: Disability Policy The court agreed 
to resolve a dispute among the lower federal courts over the relationship 
between the Americans With Disabilities Act and receipt of Social 
Security disability benefits. The disabilities act, a 1990 federal 
law, prohibits employers from discriminating against ``a qualified 
individual with a disability,'' meaning someone who is able to work, 
although perhaps with reasonable accommodations to the disability. 
The question in this case, Cleveland vs. Policy Management Systems, 
No. 97-1008, is whether receipt of disability benefits under Social 
Security creates a presumption that the employee is not able to work 
and is therefore not covered by the disabilities act. The extent of 
disability necessary to qualify for Social Security benefits is considerable: 
a person must be unable ``to engage in any substantial gainful activity'' 
in the economy. Some federal courts have ruled that a person who qualifies 
as disabled for Social Security purposes is, by virtue of that fact, 
outside the disabilities act's protection. In this case, the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit, in New Orleans, established 
a presumption to that effect, and dismissed a disabilities act suit 
brought against an employer by a woman who had collected Social Security 
benefits following a stroke. The woman argued that her subsequent 
dismissal from her job violated the disabilities act. Reporters' Access 
Without comment, the court turned down an appeal from a coalition 
of news organizations, including The New York Times, challenging denial 
of public access this year to court hearings and legal motions connected 
to the Whitewater independent counsel's investigation into the Lewinsky 
matter and to assertions of privileges raised by grand jury witnesses. 
Hearings on claims of executive privilege and lawyer-client privilege 
by White House officials were not announced in advance and took place 
behind closed doors. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of 
Columbia Circuit ruled on May 5 that the First Amendment did not provide 
a right of access to proceedings that were ``ancillary'' to a grand 
jury investigation. In their appeal, Dow Jones vs. Clinton, No. 97-1959, 
the news organizations said the ruling ``effectively bars the public 
from meaningful and timely access to information of overwhelming public 
interest.'' Drug Testing Also without comment, the court refused to 
hear a challenge to an Indiana school district's drug testing policy, 
under which any student who wants to participate in any extracurricular 
activity must agree to be subject to random testing for alcohol, illegal 
drugs and cigarettes. The policy, upheld earlier this year by the 
U.S. Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit, in Chicago, goes considerably 
beyond a student drug-testing policy the Supreme Court upheld three 
years ago in an Oregon case that applied only to student athletes. 
In that case, the court found that an existing drug problem and the 
role of athletes as student leaders justified the policy. In Rush 
County, Ind., a rural area with no evidence of a drug problem, the 
policy applies to members of the French club, the Future Homemakers 
of America, the library club and many others. The Indiana Civil Liberties 
Union challenged the policy on behalf of a student who had volunteered 
to videotape football games but was barred from doing so because he 
refused to submit to random drug testing. The case was Todd vs. Rush 
County Schools, No. 97-2021. Lawyer Search The court agreed to decide 
whether two Los Angeles prosecutors violated a defense lawyer's due 
process rights by having him held and searched in a separate room 
of the courthouse while his client was required to testify before 
a grand jury. The prosecutors are appealing a ruling by the 9th Circuit 
that in its timing and motivation _ to prevent the lawyer from consulting 
with his client _ the search amounted to an unreasonable interference 
with the right of the lawyer, Paul L. Gabbert, to practice his profession. 
Gabbert was representing Traci Baker, a defense witness in the trial 
of Lyle and Erik Menendez for murdering their parents. The prosecutors 
had obtained a warrant to search Gabbert to see if he was carrying 
a letter to Baker from Lyle Menendez, her former boyfriend. No letter 
was discovered. The case is Conn vs. Gabbert, No. 97-1802. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>