<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This ancient university town, with its winding streets and medieval 
grandeur, has contrived to earn its place on maps of the contemporary 
world, too. Ever since the structure of DNA was discovered here in 
1953, Cambridge has been a leading world center for molecular biology. 
And with the help of a recent bonanza from a long dead American pharmacist, 
Cambridge scientists have become leading players in the effort to 
decipher the human genome. At least one-third, and maybe half, of 
the 3 billion DNA units in the genetic programming of human cells 
are to be deciphered at the Sanger Centre in the nearby village of 
Hinxton. The Sanger Centre has produced more human DNA sequence than 
any of the seven American universities supported by the National Institutes 
of Health as part of its human genome project. The center's director, 
John E. Sulston, a biologist with a gentle voice and a heavy thatch 
of white hair, is unusual for a scientific administrator in that he 
still spends much of his time working in the laboratory. He is best 
known for having traced the exact lineage in which the single egg 
cell of the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans gives rise to the 959 
cells of the adult, a feat which took nearly 10 years of patient microscope 
work. Sulston and his principal financial backer, the Wellcome Trust 
of London, wield a certain influence in the human genome program run 
by the National Institutes of Health, with which they are allied in 
an international consortium. In May, when the NIH seemed inclined 
for a few days to let a new commercial venture take over human DNA 
sequencing, Sulston and Michael Morgan, the Wellcome Trust's program 
officer, declared that the human genome had to be in the public domain 
and that if the NIH dropped out they would sequence it all themselves. 
The NIH quickly regained its nerve. Money and tradition are two pillars 
of the Sanger Centre's prominence. The money comes from the Wellcome 
Trust, a long dormant London philanthropy founded by an American pharmacist, 
Henry S. Wellcome, who moved to Britain in 1880. Enjoined by Wellcome's 
will never to sell any part of its major asset, the pharmaceutical 
company Burroughs-Wellcome, the trust was for years unable to translate 
its growing wealth into real income. The trustees recently sidestepped 
this restriction at a time when the company had struck gold with AZT, 
the anti-AIDS drug, and other medicines. Sale of the company furnished 
the trust with an endowment currently worth $17 billion, making it 
the world's largest medical research philanthropy. The Wellcome Trust 
has spent $120 million to build a Genome Campus at Hinxton, and has 
committed $350 million more to the Sanger Centre for sequencing the 
human genome. The center's interest in sequencing the human genome 
can be traced, in a long but unbroken thread, to the discovery of 
DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid, by James Watson and Francis Crick. At 
the Cambridge Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Crick, with his colleague 
Sydney Brenner, turned to determining how the genetic message is encoded 
in DNA. With that task complete, the two men decided the brain was 
the next biological problem worthy of their attention, and Brenner 
resolved to crack the nervous system of the microscopic roundworm, 
C. elegans. That enterprise did not work out. The wiring diagram of 
the little creature's nervous system turned out to have 5,000 connections, 
far too many for its behavior to be computed, as Brenner had hoped. 
But the cadre of students, many of them American, whom Brenner recruited 
to work on the worm, began to transform C. elegans into a powerful 
pilot project for understanding for the first time how an animal is 
put together at the level of its genes. A major step toward this goal 
was taken by Sulston one of Brenner's English students. After drawing 
his famous lineage map of how C. elegans is constructed from an egg, 
Sulston decided to determine the position of the worms' genes on their 
chromosomes, a task known as mapping. The map that he and others devised 
soon pointed to the concept of sequencing the worm's DNA. The method 
for sequencing, or determining the order of the chemical units in 
DNA, was devised by another Cambridge scientist, Fred Sanger, after 
whom the Sanger Centre is named. The DNA sequencing method won him 
his second Nobel Prize in 1980. (The first was for sequencing proteins). 
But Sanger's DNA method was manual, and its speed was such that it 
would have taken 1,500 scientists working for a century to decipher 
the human genome. When machines for sequencing DNA became available, 
based on an elegant adaptation of the Sanger method, Sulston and his 
colleague Alan Coulson believed it might be possible to sequence the 
full genome of the worm. With 100 million base pairs of DNA, its genome 
is a 30th of the size of the human genome. Sulston and Coulson started 
the worm sequencing project in 1990 in collaboration with Robert H. 
Waterston, another of Brenner's worm students who is now director 
of the Genome Sequencing Center at Washington University, St. Louis. 
It was only after the worm genome project proved manageable that they 
and other biologists gained the confidence to propose sequencing the 
human genome. Scientists who study the worm have a strong ethos of 
sharing their techniques and data, an attitude that Sulston and Coulson 
did much to foster through their development of the worm's genetic 
map. They and Waterston have tried hard to inject the same community 
attitude into study of the human genome, though it is a field turbulent 
with larger egos and the brusque manners of those who see fortunes 
to be made. The Sulston-Waterston alliance has quietly generated the 
bulk of all DNA sequenced to date, being the most productive sequencers 
of both worm and human DNA. But the two centers' steady progress on 
the human genome was suddenly put at risk in May when a commercial 
rival jumped into the genome race, contending it would complete the 
job in two years. The rival was a company formed by the instrument 
maker Perkin-Elmer and J. Craig Venter, the pioneer of sequencing 
of bacterial genomes. If their effort, now named Celera, were to finish 
first, the public programs paid for by the Wellcome Trust and the 
National Institutes of Health might seem wasted effort. Sulston said 
he firmly believes that Celera will not produce a DNA sequence of 
the completeness and accuracy that scientists need. ``The truth of 
the matter is that the Perkin-Elmer enterprise needs to make a profit, 
the public needs a structure that will serve biomedical research for 
the rest of time,'' he said. ``So my main reaction is to make sure 
that whatever happens in that company doesn't derail that objective. 
Humanity will be the poorer if it does.'' Throwing down the gauntlet 
to Venter, Sulston and Waterston said in the current issue of Science 
that their rival's strategy for sequencing the human genome was likely 
to prove ``woefully inadequate'' because of its probable inability 
to distinguish between the many regions of similar DNA sequence. On 
the other hand new advances have ``removed doubts about the feasibility'' 
of their own approach, they said. nn 
</TEXT>
</DOC>