<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0451 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Each Yankee position player arrived at Yankee Stadium Monday to find 
a sheet of paper dropped in his locker _ a scouting report on Jaret 
Wright, Cleveland's starting pitcher in the first game of the American 
League Championship Series Tuesday night at the Stadium. The information 
is specific to right- and left-handed batters, what Wright may throw 
when he is behind in the count, what he likes to throw when he is 
ahead, how he uses his breaking ball. The single pages, written in 
black magic marker, are brief, only four or five sentences, simple 
keys for the hitters to consider. If they want additional information, 
there is plenty more. A team of five scouts _ including Gene Michael, 
the Yankees' director of major league scouting _ tracked the Indians 
for the last 30 days, generating chapters of information included 
in the thick binder given to Manager Joe Torre and his coaches. The 
binder, which has a red cover, has about 200 pages, including dozens 
of pages of statistics and spray charts that show where batters tend 
to hit the ball. The scouting report for the division series against 
Texas had a blue cover and helped the Yankees to dominate the Rangers 
in three games. Texas, which led the American League in batting, collected 
just 1 run and 13 hits, baffled completely by the Yankees' staff. 
The reports are meaningless, Michael said Monday, unless the players 
execute and use the information properly. But the Yankees' pitchers 
gleaned what they needed from the binders in meetings before the series 
started and then exploited the Rangers with the intelligence. Juan 
Gonzalez, the Texas slugger, drove in 157 runs during the regular 
season. But he walked only 46 times the whole year, and apparently 
the Yankees' scouts noticed that he was willing to swing at bad pitches 
in an effort to drive in runs. So the Yankees threw him mostly off-speed 
pitches low in the strike zone, often low and away. ``We pitched him 
like the count was 0-2 at all times,'' said Jorge Posada, the catcher, 
``especially when there were runners in scoring position.'' Gonzalez 
had 1 hit in 12 at-bats, a bounding double that rolled down the left-field 
line. Andy Pettitte and David Wells consistently pitched ahead in 
the count _ Wells went to a 2-0 count only twice _ and then threw 
change-ups, fooling the aggressive Rangers. ``I've always relied on 
reports,'' Wells said Monday. ``The advice is free, and it helps. 
We've got videotape in the back, to give us a look at the Cleveland 
hitters. It's all valuable information.'' Before the start of each 
series during the regular season and the playoffs, pitchers meet in 
a group with catchers to review the scouting reports. Infielders and 
outfielders meet in units to go over each opposing hitter, what his 
tendencies are, how he is hitting the ball, where he is hitting the 
ball. The reports in the post-season tend to be far more detailed 
than during the regular season, because teams of scouts observe the 
opponent, rather than just one scout. The scouts take pages of notes 
and notate every pitch, looking for trends, as if they were breaking 
down a secret code. Every player relies on the scouting information 
differently. Homer Bush, the Yankees' pinch-runner, checks the scouting 
reports for times _ the time it takes for the pitcher to deliver a 
ball homeward, the time it takes for a catcher to catch and throw 
to second base. Bush knew that when the Rangers' Ivan Rodriguez was 
at his best, he needed just 1.6 seconds to catch and throw the ball 
to second, and he knew that on average, Rodriguez needed 1.8 seconds. 
Before Bush sprints onto the field, he rechecks all the times with 
a coach, Chris Chambliss, for the catcher, the pitcher and any pitcher 
warming up in the bullpen. Paul O'Neill will fall back on his own 
experience rather than rely solely on a scouting report when he is 
batting. But O'Neill does use the spray charts to determine how he 
will position himself in right field. During the 1996 World Series, 
the outfield coach Jose Cardenal shifted O'Neill a couple of steps 
to his right with the Braves' Luis Polonia batting, based on the scouting 
reports _ and O'Neill made a running, leaning catch moving to his 
right, ending Game 5 and preserving the 1-0 lead. ``I've never questioned 
him since then,'' O'Neill said, smiling. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>