<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a tough report that was welcomed by the United States, Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan said Monday that Serbian security forces are continuing 
to carry out punitive operations against ethnic Albanians in Kosovo 
Province as part of a campaign of ``terror and violence.'' Annan acknowledged 
that he had no officials of his own to monitor the fighting in Kosovo 
and verify the level of compliance by President Slobodan Milosevic 
of Yugoslavia with the Security Council's demands that he stop the 
attacks. But drawing on accounts from the U.N. High Commissioner for 
Refugees, diplomats in the region and the Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe, the secretary-general produced a report 
that was unequivocal in its conclusions, bolstering assessments made 
by NATO and American officials. ``I am outraged by reports of mass 
killings of civilians in Kosovo, which recall the atrocities committed 
in Bosnia and Herzegovina,'' Annan wrote in his report, referring 
to Serbian-backed campaigns against Bosnian Muslims and others several 
years ago. American and NATO officials said Monday that despite some 
withdrawals, the Yugoslav army still had substantial forces in Kosovo. 
A senior NATO official estimated that four to five brigades remained. 
There was also evidence, officials said, that the Yugoslav armed forces 
had for the first time begun to disperse its air defenses, including 
surface-to-air missile batteries, throughout Kosovo and Serbia. This 
is a defensive measure, signaling that Milosevic now believes that 
NATO strikes are at least a possibility. In Brussels, NATO's secretary-general, 
Javier Solana, said Monday that it was clear that Milosevic had failed 
to respond adequately to Security Council demands, and that NATO was 
ready to act if he did not comply. American officials traveling to 
the Middle East with Secretary of State Madeleine Albright said Monday 
that NATO may meet as early as Thursday to decide whether to attack. 
Solana said he had not yet read the secretary-general's report, which 
was made public Monday morning. But he added that it seemed obvious 
that the Yugoslavs had not pulled back as demanded on Sept. 23 in 
a Security Council resolution. Annan's report will solidify that opinion, 
American officials said Monday. Albright said Monday that the secretary-general's 
report laid out starkly ``the appalling atrocities committed in Kosovo,'' 
and left no doubt that Milosevic's security forces were to blame for 
most of them. While saying that abuses had also been committed by 
the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army, which is fighting for 
Kosovo's independence, Annan said that ``it is clear beyond any reasonable 
doubt that the majority of such acts have been committed by the security 
forces in Kosovo acting under the authority of the Federal Republic 
of Yugoslavia.'' The Security Council is expected to begin discussions 
of Annan's report on Tuesday or possibly Wednesday, but it is under 
no compulsion to act. There is also disagreement among council members 
_ and within governments _ about how to proceed. In his report, which 
reads like an indictment, Annan catalogued the hallmarks of the Serbs' 
drive against the ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, which he called ``a 
collective punishment to teach them that the price of supporting the 
Kosovo Albanian paramilitary units is too high and will be even higher 
in the future.'' ``The Serbian security forces have demanded the surrender 
of weapons and have been reported to use terror and violence against 
civilians to force people to flee their homes or the place where they 
had sought refuge, under the guise of separating them from fighters 
of the Kosovo Albanian paramilitary units,'' Annan wrote. ``The tactics 
include shelling, detentions and threats to life, and finally short-notice 
demands to leave or face the consequences. ``There have been disruptions 
in electricity and other services,'' he added, ``and empty dwellings 
have been burned and looted, abandoned farm vehicles have been destroyed 
and farm animals have been burned in their barns or shot in the fields.'' 
Annan said he was concerned about the appearance of Serbian-laid land 
mines in new areas, noting that they were no longer confined to Kosovo's 
borders with Albania and Macedonia. This development, he said, was 
making it more difficult for people to move around safely and for 
relief goods to be delivered. He said that refugee officials put the 
number of displaced people at about 280,000, putting strains on families 
and food supplies within Kosovo and in neighboring regions and countries. 
The council resolution of Sept. 23, which called on Milosevic to stop 
attacks on civilians and allow refugees to return to their homes, 
was passed under a provision in the U.N. Charter that allows it to 
be enforced militarily. For several weeks, Russia has made it clear 
that it will not support the use of NATO military power in Kosovo, 
which would probably begin with air strikes and later involve the 
stationing of ground troops to monitor a peace accord. Some countries, 
including the United States, believe that NATO already has the authority 
to strike, and that returning to the council for a more explicit resolution 
would only risk a Russian veto. Other nations want clearer Security 
Council backing for attacks. Diplomats say that the French still seem 
to be debating this among themselves, with conflicting signals coming 
from Paris. On Monday, President Boris Yeltsin of Russia spoke by 
telephone for 25 minutes with Annan about Kosovo. Although U.N. officials 
did not provide details, the talks were reported from Moscow to include 
a report on a high-level delegation that Yeltsin sent to Belgrade 
on Sunday to speak with Milosevic. That delegation, led by Russia's 
foreign minister, Igor Ivanov, and Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev, 
told top Yugoslav defense officials that air strikes would be a reality 
if ``decisive measures'' were not taken, according to to a report 
from the ITAR-Tass news agency. Yeltsin said in Moscow on Monday that 
his delegation had persuaded Milosevic to allow monitors from the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to visit Kosovo. 
Annan's report left the impression that the United Nations was not 
convinced that the much-publicized pullouts of Yugoslav troops could 
be taken at face value. The secretary-general had also been given 
those assurances earlier by Yugoslavia's foreign minister, Zivadin 
Jovanovic. On Sept. 29, Annan recalled in his report, Jovanovic ``assured 
me that troops were returning to the places of their permanent location.'' 
Despite that assurance and reports in recent days of more withdrawals, 
Annan said, ``the secretariat is still receiving information that 
the government's armed presence remains significant and that operations 
of the special police continue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>