<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0457 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The General Motors Corp. plans to combine its domestic and international 
automotive operations in a shakeup to be announced on Tuesday, Wall 
Street analysts and other people close to the plan said Monday evening. 
The combined automotive operations will be led by G. Richard Wagoner 
Jr., the 45-year-old president of North American operations, who is 
expected to become GM's chief operating officer and possibly the auto 
maker's president, they said. Adding GM's empire of foreign subsidiaries 
to his responsibilities makes it more likely that Wagoner will someday 
succeed John F. Smith Jr., GM's 60-year-old chairman, chief executive 
and president. Smith scheduled a news conference for Tuesday morning, 
but GM officials declined to comment on what he would say. GM has 
had a succession of heirs apparent to Smith, and Wagoner might not 
be the last. Wagoner was highly successful running GM's Brazilian 
operations in the early 1990s, and as GM's chief financial officer 
from 1992 to 1994. But he has been unable to reverse erosion of GM's 
market share in North America since he took his current job four years 
ago. GM's North American operations have avoided at least the fractious 
management struggles that have wracked its foreign operations. Louis 
R. Hughes, GM's 49-year-old president of international operations, 
moved his base of operations back to Detroit from Zurich this summer 
after months of disputes with GM's European executives. It was not 
clear Monday night how Hughes' job might change with the latest reorganization. 
Ronald L. Zarrella, GM's group vice president for sales, service and 
marketing, is the leading candidate to become Wagoner's deputy with 
responsibility for all North American automotive operations. Other 
executives, each responsible for an overseas region, are also expected 
to report to Wagoner. For many years, GM's foreign automotive operations 
have been run almost like an independent company. GM designs a full 
range of cars in Europe and manufactures them in Europe, Latin America 
and Asia, with little effort made to use the same parts as in the 
United States. But GM's domestic and foreign design engineers have 
been collaborating for years on a new sedan design that would be manufactured 
worldwide. A consolidation of management responsibility at the top 
would partly reflect this new effort. Global auto makers are always 
struggling for the right balance between central control and regional 
autonomy. The GM change would undo a shift toward regional autonomy 
in the late 1980s, when Smith exercised considerable independence 
as the head of GM's European operations. ``This appears to be a movement 
toward getting a little more centralized,'' said Nicholas Lobaccaro, 
an analyst at Merrill Lynch. As it happens, GM's rival, the Ford Motor 
Co., has just experimented with tight central control and is moving 
in the opposite direction, strengthening the power of regional management 
teams in Europe and Latin America. Combining the top managements of 
GM's domestic and international management would permit the elimination 
of some overlapping bureaucracies and could lower costs. David Healy, 
an auto analyst at Burnham Securities, questioned whether substantial 
cost savings were possible. But other analysts said that GM's bureaucracy 
was so ponderous that overall costs might drop appreciably. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>