<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0300 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ramon Cernuda, a Miami-based publisher and passionate collector of 
modern Cuban painting, recalls his first encounter with the shadowy 
world of art forgery. But there was nothing murky about the setting: 
it was the mid-80s, in an elegant Miami home whose owner was a private 
dealer from one of Cuba's most patrician expatriate families. Therefore, 
he had no reason to doubt that the painting by Wilfredo Lam (1902-82) 
being offered to him for $200,000 was anything but an original by 
the acclaimed Cuban artist. But even as he was negotiating the purchase, 
he sent a photograph of the work to the artist's widow, Lou Lam, to 
have it authenticated. The work turned out to be a copy, and Cernuda 
learned that the dealer had tried to force Mrs. Lam into accepting 
money in exchange for her endorsement. He was outraged. Over the years, 
however, Cernuda's anger continued to mount as he saw fake paintings 
inundate the Latin American market. Despite the traditional secrecy 
with which most collectors like to shield themselves, Cernuda decided 
to speak out, and he has become one of the leading crusaders against 
forgery. ``In the '80s, the fake market was restricted to the occasional 
imitation of works by Lam, but now there is a veritable epidemic of 
fake paintings by Cuban masters from the '20s through the '60s,'' 
Cernuda said. ``Unfortunately, extortion and bribery are very much 
a part of this universe.'' Indeed, many collectors, dealers and museum 
curators agree that the recent boom in prices for Latin works has 
created a parallel fake market, particularly for modern Cuban masters. 
Mary-Anne Martin, a Manhattan dealer who founded Sotheby's Latin American 
department in 1977 and was its head until 1982, said that a growing 
demand from affluent Cuban-American families in Florida for modern 
Cuban paintings was accounting for their dramatic rise in value. ``As 
soon as art starts to get valuable, the fake market begins,'' she 
said. But it's not just Cuban art. Martin said she had detected a 
number of forgeries of Mexican works. There is some Mexican art so 
obviously fake that she is identifying the different hands of specific 
forgers, she said. ``I am offered at least one false Frida Kahlo a 
month, and I have more copies of Diego Rivera in my files than real 
ones,'' she said. The forgers are apparently getting bolder: even 
the sloppiest imitations find their way at times into auction houses 
in Spain and the United States, and across Latin America. Last November, 
for example, Christie's opened an evening sale of Latin American art 
in New York by announcing the withdrawal of six lots, all by Cuban 
modern masters, because there were doubts about their authenticity. 
The questioned works involved two paintings by Mario Carreno, two 
by Rene Portocarrero and two by Esteban Chartrand. ``One of the forged 
works was dated four years after the artist's death,'' Cernuda lamented. 
``Another carried a false authentification certificate.'' Christie's 
had previously been embarrassed, in 1993, by having to print a new 
catalog after its cover turned out to be a picture of a copy of a 
painting by the Colombian artist Fernando Botero, rather than the 
original. Botero insisted on having the copy destroyed, and a videotape 
was made of the artist and Martin taking a knife to it at a lawyer's 
office in New York. Many Boteros are said to be copied in Asia. Martin 
said a friend traveling through Saigon had come across a workshop 
where skilled craftsmen were reproducing Boteros from photographs. 
``We try to investigate as thoroughly as possible,'' said Fernando 
Gutierrez, director of the Latin American department at Christie's. 
``But sometimes we receive information after the works are published 
in the catalog. This is regrettable but can happen at any auction 
house.'' Both Christie's and Sotheby's withdrew works by Antonio Berni, 
an Argentine artist, from their November 1996 catalogs when they proved 
to be false. Since Berni works are reaching the $1 million figure, 
Ruth Benzacar, the Buenos Aires dealer who handles his estate, has 
just established an authentification committee. Some experts point 
to Cuba as the origin of many of the forgeries detected in the market. 
El Pais, the Spanish daily, recently reported that the Guardia Civil 
had broken up a ring of con men last December who were smuggling forged 
paintings into Spain from Cuba. Four are under arrest. Among the 22 
paintings uncovered by the police were works, deemed fake by experts, 
that were supposedly by Picasso and Miro and Cuban masters like Pelaez, 
Victor Manuel, Carreno and Mariano Rodriguez. ``Works sold with the 
authorization of Cuba's National Museum of Fine Arts carry an authentification 
certificate, and our customs officers are very strict,'' said Lilian 
Llanes, director of the Wilfredo Lam House of Havana and president 
of the Havana Biennial. ``The problem is that international interest 
in treasures of Cuban art has generated a huge unofficial market of 
false works that may find their way abroad.'' Finally, some experts 
conclude that a lack of in-depth knowledge of Latin American art is 
a major factor . ``The Latin market has become too huge, and expertise 
is fragmented. There just aren't experts who cover the entire art 
spectrum,'' said Mario Gilardoni, a leading Buenos Aires art market 
consultant. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>