<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Opening two new legal fronts, President Clinton's lawyers Monday accused 
the Whitewater independent counsel, Kenneth Starr, of misleading a 
federal appeals panel in a battle over lawyer-client privilege and 
asked the Justice Department to release the information he provided 
for approval to begin the Lewinsky investigation. In a letter sent 
on Monday evening to Attorney General Janet Reno, Clinton's top personal 
lawyer said that the records should be made available to test whether 
a group of ``anti-Clinton partisans'' trumped up the investigation 
of the president last January. The letter, by David E. Kendall, cited 
five recent news articles, in The New York Times and Newsday, that 
raised questions about whether some lawyers assisting Paula Corbin 
Jones in her sexual harassment lawsuit contacted prosecutors before 
Linda Tripp last January. Prosecutors in Starr's office have denied 
accusations by allies of the president that their investigation was 
coordinated with the assistance of people working on Jones' behalf. 
Reno's chief spokesman, Bert Brandenburg, said the Justice Department 
could not comment on the letter since it was received too late in 
the day. In a Supreme Court filing Monday, Clinton's lawyers also 
accused Starr of misleading a federal appeals court last June when 
he argued that impeachment was too remote an issue for the judges 
to consider in deciding whether a senior White House lawyer must testify. 
Three days after making that argument, Starr secretly petitioned a 
different panel of federal judges for permission to file an impeachment 
referral to Congress. The different tacks Starr took before the two 
courts were cited as part of the White House's efforts to reverse 
court decisions compelling the testimony of Bruce Lindsey, a deputy 
White House counsel and one of Clinton's most trusted aides. Invoking 
the lawyer-client privilege on behalf of the president, Lindsey has 
declined to answer some questions in the grand jury that has been 
examining Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky. At a hearing 
on June 29 over the privilege, Starr conceded before the appeals court 
that government lawyers could confidentially advise the president 
during an impeachment proceeding. Starr added, however, that it was 
premature to consider the impeachment question for purposes of the 
lawyer-client privilege case. ``That's not where we are,'' Starr told 
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, a court where 
he once served as a judge. ``It is premature for this court to look 
down the road and look at impeachment. It is beyond the compass of 
this case.'' But on July 2, three days later, Starr secretly filed 
a motion before a special federal panel of judges asking for permission 
to make an impeachment referral to Congress. The panel granted Starr's 
request three weeks later. When Starr filed his impeachment referral 
last month with Congress, he disclosed the secret motion. On July 
27, the Court of Appeals ruled against the White House, holding that 
Clinton could not invoke the privilege to limit the questioning of 
Lindsey. The White House appealed that decision to the Supreme Court. 
In a brief filed Monday with the court, the president's lawyers criticized 
the Office of Independent Counsel for failing to level with the federal 
appeals court. ``To our knowledge, the Office of Independent Counsel 
never sought to correct the record in the court of appeals,'' the 
White House lawyers wrote. ``Nor, in its brief in this court, has 
the OIC explained why it made such a representation or, for that matter, 
even addressed in any meaningful fashion the constitutional implications 
of its role in the impeachment process.'' Charles G. Bakaly III, a 
spokesman for the independent counsel, said the issue presented in 
the brief was ``a red herring,'' particularly since the lawyer-client 
privilege could not be invoked to shield Lindsey's testimony even 
before Congress. ``The common law privilege at issue here would not 
apply at impeachment proceedings, which recognize only constitutional 
privileges,'' Bakaly said. ``The court of appeals agrees with us.'' 
In his Supreme Court brief, Starr urged the justices to deny the White 
House appeal and not disturb the decision. The appeals court ruled 
that in impeachment proceedings, executive privilege was the only 
possible shield that the President could invoke to keep the advice 
of his aides confidential. In rejecting the lawyer-client privilege 
in both the criminal inquiry and in any impeachment proceeding, the 
court said the special obligations of all government lawyers was different 
from private lawyers. ``When an executive branch attorney is called 
before a federal grand jury to give evidence about alleged crimes 
within the executive branch, reason and experience, duty and tradition 
dictate that the attorney shall provide that evidence,'' the court 
said. ``Government attorneys stand in a far different position from 
members of the private bar. Their duty is not to defend clients against 
criminal charges and it is not to protect wrongdoers from public exposure. 
The constitutional responsibility of the president and all members 
of the executive branch, is to `take care that the laws be faithfully 
executed.''' The court is expected to decide later this fall whether 
it will hear the appeal. The justices are also considering whether 
to grant an appeal by the Secret Service to the court orders that 
have compelled the testimony of the president's bodyguards. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>