<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0284 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The art of glowering, as opposed to that of merely glaring, is being 
practiced with exemplary skill on the stage of Playwrights Horizons 
at the moment. Portraying a landlady and her tenant at rancorous odds 
with each other in ``The Uneasy Chair,'' an anemic comedy by the young 
dramatist Evan Smith, Dana Ivey and Roger Rees turn their eyes into 
simmering bogs of unspeakable hostility and discontent. Yes, the word 
is definitely glower, unless you prefer the term ``baleful glances.'' 
If the vocabulary sounds antiquated, it is also appropriate. Smith's 
play is set, with pointed self-consciousness, in London in the age 
of Victoria, when artificial postures came as naturally as breathing 
and words were often filigreed. Rees, who did hard time in that era 
as the redoubtable star of ``Nicholas Nickleby,'' and Ivey, an actress 
of rarefied comic instincts, know just how to exploit that sensibility. 
Working their way through the maze of euphemisms and indirection with 
which their characters (bearing the unbearable names of Miss Amelia 
Pickles and Capt. Josiah Wickett) address each other, these performers 
give new weight to the idea of the word made flesh. Gestures, carriage, 
facial expressions, all are perfectly keyed to the stiff, arch language 
they speak. When Miss Pickles puts on ``an exhibition of youthful 
gaiety'' or Captain Wickett complains about being harassed by ``a 
fierce campaign of solicitude,'' you only wish that Phiz, the fabled 
illustrator of Dickens, were still around to sketch them. Unfortunately, 
all this fine comic embroidery is plied to embellish a play that is, 
at best, a small needlepoint sampler. Smith has obviously made a close 
study of things Victorian, from genteel romance novels to the plays 
of Oscar Wilde. But he uses his knowledge less to comment on a cultural 
preciousness than to emulate it. Directed at an ill-advised, leisurely 
trot by Richard Cottrell, ``The Uneasy Chair'' feels as if it should 
be over before it even reaches the end of its first act. Handsomely 
produced and cast with top-drawer comic talents, the play is nonetheless 
a fanciful sketch stretched to the point of emaciation. It is, one 
presumes, some sort of homage to John Maddison Morton's ``Box and 
Cox,'' the classic landlady farce of 1847, but Morton's play takes 
less than half the time to perform. Set amid the plump, peach-colored 
appointments of Miss Pickles' drawing room (designed by Derek McLane), 
with costumes (by Jess Goldstein) that are as fully upholstered as 
the furniture, the comedy charts the unhappy evolution of its two 
main characters from landlady and lodger to husband and wife. This 
comes about through such vintage devices as misread letters and misunderstood 
conversations. The central nonlove story is paralleled by the relationship 
between Miss Pickles' niece (Haviland Morris) and the captain's nephew 
(Paul Fitzgerald), which misfires for reasons befitting a younger 
generation. Michael Arkin portrays an assortment of other characters, 
including a barrister who represents both the plaintiff and the accused 
in a breach-of-promise suit. This bit, like much of the rest of the 
play, is initially funny and eventually wearisome. Smith provides 
decent if less than scintillating imitations of period circumlocutions 
and Wildean epigrams. (Miss Pickles describes her niece as one of 
society's ``most sought-after beauties for 11 or 12 seasons.'') And 
he creates some amusing set pieces, including a whimsical parlor game 
that quickly turns into a source of nettlesome frustration for all 
its participants. That's rather like the experience of watching Smith's 
play. PRODUCTION NOTES: `THE UNEASY CHAIR' By Evan Smith; directed 
by Richard Cottrell; sets by Derek McLane; costumes by Jess Goldstein; 
lighting by Peter Kaczorowski; sound by JR Conklin; production manager, 
Christopher Boll; production stage manager, Laurie Goldfeder. Presented 
by Playwrights Horizons, Tim Sanford, artistic director; Leslie Marcus, 
managing director; Lynn Landis, general manager. At Playwrights Horizons. 
With: Roger Rees (Capt. Josiah Wickett), Dana Ivey (Amelia Pickles), 
Haviland Morris (Alexandrina Crosbie), Paul Fitzgerald (John Darlington) 
and Michael Arkin (Edward Cagebee and others). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>