<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0308 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Charles Ives' ``Emerson'' Concerto is less buried treasure than Poe's 
purloined letter. Rediscovered pieces may indeed emerge intact from 
the back of a composer's sock drawer, but others have been there all 
along, lying inscrutable among a welter of sketches and notes. This 
20-minute piece for piano and orchestra had its first performances 
over the weekend at Severance Hall thanks to a musicologist named 
David G. Porter, who has assembled Ives' many shreds of evidence and 
parsed his hieroglyphics into an apparently coherent form. Unfinished 
pieces do not necessarily suffer from incompleteness. In Ives' case, 
he has left too much for our own good: years of altered decisions, 
additions and subtractions that have forced Porter to do a lot of 
deciding on his own. We know the concerto indirectly as the source 
for the ``Emerson'' movement of the ``Concord'' Sonata,'' a solo piano 
work finished in 1912. Thereafter, Ives labored over the various ideas 
in various forms for almost 40 years; and as Porter pointed out in 
his program notes for Saturday night's Cleveland Orchestra program, 
completion may not have been particularly on his mind. Like a gardener 
whose flower beds are never finished, Ives worked on some pieces just 
to watch them grow and change. I fear the saga of discovery may be 
more interesting than the music itself. Yet there are some, I am sure, 
who will find more importance in this blunt and graceless piece than 
I. If the baritonal militance of Ives' orchestra is intentional _ 
if he truly meant tuba, trombones and deep strings to obliterate every 
other instrument around them _ then his instrumental writing succeeds. 
The piano part has much the same effect. Valiantly portrayed here 
by Alan Feinberg, it offers brute-force virtuosity and clotted textures 
with halting lyrical contrasts. I leave it to New Englanders steeped 
in harsh speaking, gritty personal values and hard winters to find 
the beauties here. I cannot. Ives' trademarks are everywhere: in the 
separations of orchestra into independently moving parts and especially 
in the familiar materials straining through semi-chaos to be recognized 
and acknowledged. Beethoven's Fifth Symphony is the most persistent 
knocker on the door; indeed, Fate-in-four-notes appears in every conceivable 
rhythmic variant and transposition. Standing in contrast to the ``Emerson'' 
Concerto on Saturday was ``Central Park in the Dark.'' Shorter and 
more elegantly conceived, it puts Ives' extraordinary gifts in the 
highest profile. Quiet string chords float on a tidal ebb and flow, 
and against them play the snippets of night life and popular song 
that Ives evokes by means of solo winds, brass, percussion and piano. 
It is a work not only of great sophistication but also of impudent 
originality. It was handled scrupulously in this performance. One 
came to Cleveland to hear Ives but came away deeply impressed by other 
matters. After intermission, Christoph von Dohnanyi and his orchestra 
played the Beethoven ``Eroica'' Symphony, a piece so familiar that 
one braced for yet another performance of it. How wrong to do so. 
Beautifully planned, with each phrase and dynamic conscious of every 
other phrase, it was played by the Cleveland with that strange combination 
of force and fastidiousness that only a few important orchestras possess. 
The musicians had already played the ``Eroica'' on Thursday and Friday 
evenings and were scheduled for yet a fourth run-through the following 
afternoon. Yet rarely does one hear informed intensity like this. 
It was a musical power that extended to each back-bench string player 
and then reached out to touch everyone seated in this agreeably shabby 
and soon to be restored hall. There is a moral force to such playing 
that we in New York seldom experience, and it was felt on both sides 
of the footlights. Maybe New Yorkers have too much going for their 
own good, and maybe Cleveland, with somewhat fewer outlets, better 
channels its spiritual energies _ in this case through a magnificent 
orchestra, splendidly led. I hope the citizens of Cleveland recognize 
how lucky they are. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>