<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0468 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Their seasons turn. Their teams change. Their roles reverse. But in 
the middle of another New York October baseball parable, two inescapable 
names, Doc and Darryl, continue to run deep. Darryl Strawberry, the 
Yankees' motivating angel. Dwight Gooden, the Cleveland Indians' tentative 
Game 4 starter in the American League Championship Series, or potential 
long man out of the bullpen Tuesday night in Game 1. They met 15 years 
ago, an eternity in sports, yet much of the abundant mail he still 
receives from the New York area, Gooden said, reflects on Doc and 
Darryl, on a fairy tale that so many times has been rudely interrupted 
by real life. Maybe that is precisely the point, the explanation for 
our underlying fascination with two very public lives which have mixed 
stunning success with spectacular failure. Maybe we don't mind human 
frailty in our so-called heroes as much as some people think. As long 
as they don't give up. ``Sometimes I ask myself about that,'' Gooden 
said Monday at Yankee Stadium. ``The fans here stuck with me, and 
there have been times, like 1987 and 1994, when they could have easily 
said, `What's up with this guy?''' Of course, that is exactly what 
was said, over and over, about Gooden and Strawberry, those flawed 
former Mets bookends, who have been impeached by the critics so many 
times. Late in their baseball lives, they were welcomed back by New 
York's fans, whose opinions always mattered more than the news media 
mob. ``I wish I could shake every one of their hands personally,'' 
Gooden said. He is cast as the enemy this time, but a year ago, Gooden 
sat on the Yankee bench in Jacobs Field, Mariano Rivera trying to 
protect his one-run lead, one out in the eighth, Sandy Alomar at the 
plate. Gooden, without a post-season victory to his credit, watched 
Alomar smoke the ball into the right-field seats. The Yankees never 
got the lead back in that series, a subject revisited so many times 
in their clubhouse Monday that Paul O'Neill finally said, ``A lot 
of people in here are getting tired of hearing about last year.'' 
Seasons turn. Teams change. Roles reverse. ``Sandy's shown me that 
tape a couple of times,'' Gooden said, able to laugh off his new teammate's 
needle. ``I'm just sitting there in the dugout, shaking my head. Sandy 
just had that magic all season and in the playoffs last year.'' This 
season, Alomar hit .235 with 6 home runs and 44 RBIs. This season, 
the magic has aligned itself with the Yankees, 117 times and counting. 
A year ago, Strawberry didn't make it into the playoffs, knee surgery 
taking him out in September. Gooden, a strong second-half pitcher 
this season, said he had pictured the setting of their post-season 
reunion: Yankee Stadium, him on the mound, Strawberry at the plate. 
Then last Wednesday night, Gooden heard that Strawberry was on his 
way to the hospital, ultimately to an operating table Saturday for 
colon cancer surgery. They spoke the next night, Gooden telling Strawberry 
he was praying for him and Strawberry teasing Gooden about his first-inning 
ejection in Game 2 of the Indians' division series against Boston. 
Gooden called New York's reaction to Strawberry's illness touching. 
He said he would visit Strawberry Tuesday. They have both fought drug 
abuse, and who knows what detours lie ahead, but who would have thought 
a few years ago that Strawberry would ever be a repository of so much 
compassion and love? Seasons turn. People change. For so many years, 
Gooden got the benefit of doubt that Strawberry couldn't buy. When 
Strawberry's agent, the late Bill Goodstein, floated the Yankees' 
interest in 1995, the local sports pages erupted as if George Steinbrenner 
had sold the team to Saddam Hussein. President Clinton's drug czar, 
Lee Brown, complained of (hah!) poor messages being sent to kids. 
The following season, Gooden signed with the Yankees, pitched a no-hitter 
in May and was handed the keys to New York by its Yankee-fawning Mayor. 
From that night on, right through Frank Torre's heart transplant, 
you knew the Yankees had more than a 25-man roster working for them. 
``We know it makes it easier for Darryl to sleep when we win games,'' 
Tino Martinez said Monday, wishing out loud that he could ``hit three 
home runs'' Tuesday night for Strawberry, before adding that there 
are no guarantees. There is only a sense of things to come, a prediction 
of the heart that Gooden, in a way, will be pitching against Strawberry 
in this series after all. Seasons turn. Roles reverse. Yanks in five. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>