<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On Jan. 31, 1974, at the end of a session similar to the one Monday, 
the House Judiciary Committee voted unanimously to recommend to the 
full House that an impeachment inquiry against President Richard M. 
Nixon be authorized. On Feb. 6, the House voted, 410-4, to begin the 
formal inquiry. At first blush, this looks like a paragon of bipartisanship. 
And that is the way many Judiciary Committee members Monday referred 
to the Nixon proceedings. Rep. James Rogan, R-Calif., pointed to a 
portrait of Peter Rodino of New Jersey, the Democrat who headed the 
Judiciary Committee in the Nixon years, and declared, ``He brought 
fairness to these hearings 24 years ago.'' Rep. Steven Rothman, a 
Democrat who now is the only member of the committee from New Jersey, 
said that Rodino had ``set the standard for American fairness.'' But 
the truth is that although the Judiciary Committee back then may have 
been a bit more temperate than the panel was Monday, its deliberations 
in 1974 were frequently angry and highly partisan. From the outset, 
Republicans, then in the minority, fought unsuccessfully to have a 
time limit placed on the investigation, to limit the scope of the 
inquiry and to establish a definition of impeachable offenses _ the 
same battles the Democrats waged and lost Monday. Before the unanimous 
and lopsided votes were taken in 1974, one vote after another to establish 
the rules and procedures had been cast along party lines. One such 
vote would have given Republicans control of one-third of the committee's 
budget and staff. In the end, Republicans were given only a dozen 
of the more than 130 staff positions on the inquiry. Democrats now 
have about one-third of the slots on a much smaller staff. One of 
the most junior Democratic lawyers in 1974 was Hillary Rodham, 26 
years old when she was hired and six months out of law school. She 
did legal and factual research on a variety of topics, said those 
who worked with her, but was never in a decision-making position. 
The following year, she married Bill Clinton. Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi 
is the only Republican in Congress today who was a member of the Judiciary 
Committee that investigated Nixon. Now the Senate Republican leader, 
Lott, who voted against all articles of impeachment, was asked last 
month how he remembered those proceedings. ``If that was bipartisan, 
I would like to see partisanship,'' he replied. ``I remember very 
definitely how partisan I thought it was.'' At the time, in words 
strikingly similar to what Democrats said Monday, Lott told Congressional 
Quarterly: ``It has all been decided. We are just going through an 
exercise. Right now, I doubt whether it will be expeditious or fair.'' 
In an Op-Ed article Monday in The Washington Post, M. Caldwell Butler, 
who was a congressman from Virginia in 1974 and one of the six (out 
of 17) Republicans on the Judiciary Committee who voted for impeachment, 
ran through a series of partisan moves by Rodino and his Democratic 
colleagues that preceded the Jan. 31 committee vote and added, ``Partisanship 
continued throughout the inquiry.'' If there was one big difference 
between the partisanship then and now, it is that the party leaders 
in Congress in 1974 expressed respect for one another. For example, 
after Rodino promised to try to wrap up his inquiry by the end of 
April, John Rhodes of Arizona, then the House Republican leader, spoke 
against a Republican effort to set an April 30 deadline in law. Rodino's 
word, Rhodes declared, was ``good with me.'' Rodino's promise to the 
contrary, the inquiry was not concluded until July 30. Like theologians 
debating the Scriptures, the lawmakers at the hearing Monday sifted 
through the documents of yesteryear to find quotations that applied 
to the positions they are now taking. For example, Rep. John Conyers 
of Michigan, the top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee and the only 
member Monday who was on the Nixon panel, used this quotation from 
a 1974 staff report on what constitutes impeachable offense: ``Constitutional 
wrongs that subvert the structure of government or undermine the integrity 
of office and even the Constitution itself.'' Rep. Charles Canady, 
R-Fla., quoted another part of the same report as saying that there 
were ``no fixed standards for determining whether grounds for impeachment 
exist.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>