<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You, too? Were you thinking that Bill Parcells took two years away 
from football after winning Super Bowl XXV with the Giants in 1991 
with grit and defense and a running game and then watched too much 
television? Heck, he was on TV. As a football analyst. Watching the 
49ers and the Bills and the West Coast offense and the no-huddle offense. 
It was as if the guy discovered something in football during that 
two-year television stint _ the passing game and lots of points _ 
and decided, hey, I'm going to try that stuff. His teams in New England 
with Drew Bledsoe threw the ball. Bledsoe even threw it 48 times in 
the Patriots' Super Bowl XXXI loss to Green Bay. Last year, Parcells 
took over the Jets and ran it 431 times and passed it 564. His defense 
was becoming second fiddle to his offense. In half their games a year 
ago, the Jets allowed 20 points or more. This season began with a 
36-30 overtime loss in San Francisco. The Jets entered the game against 
Miami last Sunday ranked 30th in overall defense. There are only 30 
National Football League teams. Translation: The Jets entered dead 
last, the worst in allowing offensive yards. A closer look revealed 
a No. 27 ranking against the run and a No. 26 against the pass. Lots 
of yards does not always mean lots of points, but be honest _ you 
were waiting for that 101-100 Jets game, right? Well, keep waiting. 
There is good news for the Jets that goes beyond their 20-9 victory 
over the Dolphins a Giants Stadium. The Jets showed they are quite 
capable of playing real defense. Suffocating defense. Three-plays-and-a-punt 
defense. Run-stopping defense. Turnover-producing defense. Since those 
36 points by the 49ers, the Jets' defense allowed 17 in losing to 
Baltimore and 6 in beating Indianapolis and now 9 to Miami. Better 
and better. The Jets took on a Miami challenge, a Miami insistence 
that it would run the ball, and declared: No, you will not. The Jets 
played the run first, played the pass second and stared Dan Marino 
down. Risky business. But the Jets made it work. The players made 
it work. Bill Belichick, the defensive coordinator, made it work. 
It says something that the Jets are missing three key players _ linebackers 
Marvin Jones (knee), Casey Dailey (foot) and James Farrior (knee) 
_ and can still play good defense. Well, maybe what it says is that 
is why three of the team's current top-five tacklers play in the secondary. 
Only Farrior will return this season. And yet, the Jets have moved 
on. They swarmed to the ball against the Dolphins _ linebackers Mo 
Lewis and Pepper Johnson, tackle Jason Ferguson and safety Victor 
Green each made five tackles _ and they produced three Marino sacks. 
Before that, the Jets had earned only three sacks in three games. 
The coverage was good and the third-down defense was better, and a 
team that planned to run its way to victory found that it could gain 
only one rushing first down while the Jets gained eight. So, you look 
today and the Jets have leaped from 30th to 21st in overall defense 
in the NFL. They have soared from 27th against the run to 20th. From 
26th against the pass to 22nd. All in a day's work. And Parcells looks 
as if he were finding his way home. Of course, he is playing with 
the hand he dealt himself and he has only been on the job with the 
Jets for 20 games. Let's see whether he can build a defensive gem, 
as he did with his teams of old. True, there are no L.T.'s in football 
right now. But there are play-making defensive players in college 
and among NFL free agents. Will the Jets collect them? Will they become, 
truly, more defensive-minded than offensive? And will they ultimately 
find a combination of defense and offense that clicks? Dominating 
defense _ that was the identity of Parcells' earlier teams. And that 
was how the Jets played Miami, with the Jets' offense being employed 
in complementary fashion with 38 rushes and 32 passes. Not the 24 
rushes and 58 passes the Jets used against San Francisco. Belichick 
deserves credit for devising and implementing the Jets' defensive 
ideas. He is crafty, hard-working. He challenges offenses in his play-calling 
and he challenges his players by putting them in positions to make 
game-winning or back-breaking plays. He picks his spots. He picks 
his players carefully in terms of who gets what. And he studies. He 
had two weeks to prepare for the Dolphins and he attacked them where 
it hurt. He and Parcells persuaded the team to shift its attitude 
to match and then surpass the Dolphins' cockiness and confidence. 
And output. The Jets are at St. Louis this weekend and then they will 
see plenty of teams that can roll on offense. They will see Bledsoe's 
arm with New England. Kansas City's power-running game. Steve McNair's 
athleticism at quarterback and Yancey Thigpen's acrobatics at receiver 
for Tennessee. Warren Moon and fleet Seattle. Miami and Marino again. 
Bledsoe again. There will be lots of chances for the Jets _ and Parcells 
_ to play defense. To, first, make it like it was. And then something 
new. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>