<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0446 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a long day that veered from sober constitutional discourse to 
bitter partisan scrapping, the House Judiciary Committee voted along 
party lines on Monday night to recommend that Congress open a formal 
impeachment investigation of a president for only the third time in 
the nation's history. After hearing the investigative counsel for 
the Republicans outline 15 possible grounds for impeachment of President 
Clinton, the committee, on a vote of 21 to 16, sent to the House a 
resolution modeled after the language used in the Watergate inquiry. 
It authorizes the committee ``to investigate fully and completely 
whether sufficient grounds exist for the House of Representatives 
to exercise its constitutional power to impeach William Jefferson 
Clinton.'' The Democrats tried and failed, on another party line vote, 
to substitute a plan for a more limited, two-phase inquiry. It would 
have required the committee first to define an impeachable offense 
before deciding whether to open a formal inquiry. Their proposal put 
them as well as the Republicans on record in support of further inquiry 
into the president. Many Democrats sharply condemned Clinton's behavior 
but said it fell short of warranting impeachment. The full House is 
set to vote on the impeachment inquiry as early as Thursday, as one 
of its last acts before recessing for the midterm elections. The chairman 
of the committee, Rep. Henry Hyde, opened the nearly 11 hours of deliberations 
by reminding everyone that on Monday the committee was not considering 
the impeachment of the president but simply deciding whether to investigate 
further. ``We are not here to pass judgment on anyone,'' the Illinois 
Republican said. ``We are here to ask and answer this one single question 
_ based on what we now know _ do we have a duty to look further or 
to look away?'' Throughout the day, the memories of Watergate were 
summoned repeatedly as Republicans and Democrats presented sharply 
different views of the severity of the president's evasions over his 
affair with Monica Lewinsky in two legal forums. Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., 
even revived the infamous Watergate phrase about a ``cancer'' in the 
presidency to describe Clinton's behavior. In making his case for 
an impeachment inquiry before the final vote, David Schippers, the 
chief investigative counsel for the Republicans, told the committee 
that ``substantial and credible evidence'' existed of 15 possibly 
impeachable offenses by Clinton, more than the 11 such charges made 
by Kenneth Starr, the Whitewater independent counsel. The core of 
his argument concerned the sanctity of the nation's judicial system 
and the president's role as the nation's chief law enforcement officer. 
``The principle that every witness in every case must tell the truth, 
the whole truth and nothing but the truth, is the foundation of the 
American system of justice which is the envy of every civilized nation,'' 
he said. ``If lying under oath is tolerated and when exposed, is not 
visited with immediate and substantial adverse consequences,'' Schippers 
said, ``the integrity of this country's entire judicial process is 
fatally compromised and that process will inevitably collapse.'' Schippers 
recast Starr's own charges somewhat. He dropped what many lawyers 
considered to be Starr's two weakest accusations, including abuse 
of power, stemming from claims of White House privilege and from Clinton's 
refusal to voluntarily testify while misleading potential witnesses. 
And on the possible charges of perjury, Schippers chose to refer to 
those acts as making false statements, which some committee members 
said would be easier to prove. He divided some of Starr's charges 
and added several new ones including a failure to disclose Ms. Lewinsky's 
filing of a false affidavit and a ``conspiracy'' to obstruct justice. 
As evidence of a conspiracy, he highlighted three days of constant 
phone calls to and from the White House showing Clinton reaching out 
to his friend Vernon Jordan and his secretary, Betty Currie, after 
he denied a sexual relationship with Ms. Lewinsky during a deposition 
in the sexual harassment case of Paula Jones in January. The calls 
then show Mrs. Currie trying repeatedly to find Ms. Lewinsky, instructing 
her in code to ``Call Kay.'' Ending his testimony with a touch of 
drama, Schippers asked to speak not as a committee staff member, but 
as a citizen, a father and a grandfather. Paraphrasing Sir Thomas 
Moore in the play ``A Man of All Seasons,'' he said, ``The laws of 
this country are the great barriers that protect the citizen from 
the winds of evil and tyranny.'' Lecturing the committee, the Chicago 
lawyer, who is a lifelong Democrat, added, ``Fifteen generations of 
Americans, our fellow Americans, many of whom are reposing in military 
cemeteries throughout the world are looking down on and judging what 
you do today.'' The Democrats objected and Hyde, the committee chairman 
who had selected Schippers as his counsel, had the final remarks removed 
from the record. In a rebuttal, Abbe Lowell, the counsel for the Democrats, 
countered that impeachment is reserved only for high crimes against 
the state and that no matter how the Republicans had recast Starr's 
case, ``one basic allegation _ the president was engaged in an improper 
relationship which he did not want disclosed _ is the core charge.'' 
In contrast to Schippers, he contested the legal significance of Clinton's 
original denial of his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky in the Jones 
case. Lowell said that Judge Susan Webber Wright of Federal District 
Court in Little Rock, Ark., called evidence about Ms. Lewinsky unessential 
to the sexual harassment case against the president. Judge Wright 
decided, after a motion by Starr, that his criminal investigation 
overrode the Jones lawyers' need to continue their pursuit of evidence 
involving Ms. Lewinsky. She ultimately dismissed Mrs. Jones' lawsuit 
last April, ruling that Mrs. Jones had not proved that she had suffered 
any harm after her alleged encounter with Clinton. ``The judge was 
giving the committee the ability to determine that the president's 
statements, whether truthful or not, were not of the legal importance 
suggested by Starr,'' Lowell said, ``let alone grave constitutional 
significance to support impeachment.'' He also accused Starr of overreaching 
and showing bias when he cast the president's claims of executive 
privilege as an abuse of power. ``This was not an attempt to organize 
his staff to spread misinformation about the progress of the war in 
Vietnam,'' Lowell said, returning to the Watergate era. ``Or about 
a break-in of the Democratic headquarters at the Watergate, or even 
about how funds from arms sales in Iran were diverted to aid the Contras 
in Nicaragua. This was a president repeating to his staff the same 
denial of an inappropriate and extremely embarrassing relationship 
that he had already denied to the public directly.'' The committee 
met in the same cavernous hearing room where Richard Nixon's own fate 
was debated 24 years ago. Behind the dais of lawmakers stared down 
oil paintings of Hyde and of former Rep. Peter W. Rodino Jr., D-N.J., 
who presided over the Watergate inquiry. Time and again, Democrats 
sought to turn attention as much on Starr as on Clinton. ``Do we want 
to have prosecutors with unlimited powers accountable to no one, who 
will spend millions of dollars investigating a person's sex life?'' 
asked Rep. John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the senior Democrat on the 
committee. ``Who then haul before grand juries every person of the 
opposite sex the person has had contact with? Who then record and 
release videos to the public of the grand jury questioning of the 
most private aspects of one's sex life?'' Republicans, by contrast, 
cast Mrs. Jones as a victim who had been denied her day in court through 
Clinton's evasions. ``Bill Clinton, first as governor and then as 
president, using the power entrusted to him coarsely demanded personal 
favors from individual citizens,'' said Barr, a longtime critic of 
the president. When Mrs. Jones refused, Barr said, ``Bill Clinton 
continued to abuse his office to smear that citizen's name and block 
her access to justice.'' He added, ``We are witnessing nothing less 
than the symptoms of a cancer on the American presidency.'' A few 
members of the committee departed from party lines to look for a middle 
ground. Rep. Howard Berman, D-Calif., chastised both parties alike. 
Republicans, he said, have ``an obligation to recognize that high 
crimes and misdemeanors has a meaning. All felonies are not high crimes 
and misdemeanors.'' He told Democrats that they had to recognize that 
it was a Democratic Congress, at the urging of Clinton, which passed 
the law that allowed the naming of an independent counsel. And it 
was Clinton's attorney general, Janet Reno, who approved Starr's inquiry 
into the Lewinsky matter. On the other side of the aisle, Rep. Lindsey 
Graham, R-S.C., said, ``I have no idea what I am going to do yet.'' 
Graham, one of the conservative rebels who had once tried to topple 
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, said, ``I don't know if censure is appropriate. 
We should just drop it or we should throw him out of office. Nobody 
knows yet in my opinion who has really got an open mind about this 
thing. Is this Watergate or Peyton Place? I don't know.'' Only one 
lawmaker drew applause on Monday, and only from the Democratic sideof 
the aisle. ``The president had an affair,'' shouted Rep. Robert Wexler, 
D-Fla. ``He lied about it. He didn't want anyone to know about it. 
Does anyone reasonably believe that this amounts to a subversion of 
government? Does anybody reasonably believe this amounts to subversion 
of government?'' Monday's committee vote marked only the third time 
that Congress has begun a formal impeachment process against a president. 
The first time was against Andrew Johnson. But it is far from a foregone 
conclusion that Clinton will be removed from office. If the House 
votes as expected later this week to authorize an impeachment inquiry, 
the Judiciary Committee then begins the process of holding hearings 
and weighing the evidence against Clinton. It then decides whether 
to recommend that the full House impeach the president, the equivalent 
of an indictment. If the House impeaches, the Senate then tries the 
president with the chief justice of the United States presiding. It 
takes a two-thirds vote of the Senate to remove a president from office. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>