<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This year is the 100th anniversary of the Nobel-prize-winning experiments 
by Marie and Pierre Curie into the origins of radioactivity, and their 
discovery of the radioactive elements polonium and radium. Marie Curie 
herself coined the term ``radioactivity,'' and a century ago, the 
word conveyed promise and evoked excitement. As the spontaneous release 
of energy from certain substances, radioactivity was regarded as a 
newly identified force of nature, something that would surely lead 
to insights into the structure of matter, and to practical applications 
in medicine and science. But as they would with other 20th century 
marvels, scientists soon realized that they might have unleashed a 
menace. They began to suspect that radiation might be a threat to 
health. Another decade went by, though, before those concerns were 
taken seriously. Marie Curie tended to deny the perils of radiation, 
despite being deeply troubled by the deaths in the 1920's of colleagues 
and radiation workers from leukemia. Curie's decades of exposure left 
her chronically ill and nearly blind from cataracts, and ultimately 
caused her death at 67, in 1934, from either severe anemia or leukemia. 
But she never fully acknowledged that her work had ruined her health. 
Her daughter, Irene Joliot-Curie, and son-in-law, Frederic Joliot-Curie 
_ also Nobel Prize winners _ continued her work with radioactive material. 
Eventually, both also died of diseases induced by radiation. But by 
all accounts Marie Curie was so intent on her research that even if 
she had known the risks there is no reason to believe she would have 
done anything differently _ or that she necessarily should have, given 
her achievements. When Marie and Pierre Curie began to experiment 
with radiation, advances in physics had just begun to capture the 
public imagination. X-rays, discovered by Wilhelm Roentgen in 1895, 
were being used to diagnose broken bones and help surgeons find bullets, 
and X-ray pictures of the human body had fascinated newspaper readers. 
The Curies set out to study radioactivity in 1898, two years after 
Henri Becquerel discovered the phenomenon when he noticed that crystals 
of uranium salt could fog a photographic plate. Initially, the Curies 
studied emissions from various minerals and by the end of the year 
had made discoveries that would lead to a Nobel Prize they shared 
with Becquerel in 1903, and another awarded to Marie alone in 1911. 
(Because the Nobel is not awarded posthumously, Pierre Curie, who 
died in an accident in 1906, was not cited.) Their first accomplishment 
was to show that radioactivity was a property of atoms themselves. 
Scientifically, that was the most important of their findings, because 
it helped other researchers refine their understanding of atomic structure. 
The second, more famous discovery, was the discovery of polonium and 
radium. Radium was the most radioactive substance the Curies had encountered. 
Its radioactivity is due to the large size of the atom, which makes 
the nucleus unstable and prone to decay, usually to radon and then 
lead, by emitting particles and energy as it seeks a more stable configuration. 
Radium does not exist free in nature; rather, like uranium, it is 
melded into the mineral pitchblende. To study radium, the Curies spent 
countless hours bathed in a radioactive miasma, stirring vats of pitchblende 
in order to extract infinitesimal amounts of radium. Marie Curie struggled 
to purify it for medical uses, including early radiation treatment 
for tumors. But radium's bluish glow caught people's fancy, and companies 
in the United States began mining it and selling it as a novelty: 
for glow-in-the-dark light pulls, for instance, and bogus cure-all 
patent medicines that actually killed people. Wristwatches with radium-painted 
luminous dials became a fad almost overnight. The first large factory 
to produce the glowing watches, the Radium Luminous Materials Corp., 
was opened in 1917, in Orange, N.J. Soon, other companies opened plants 
in Connecticut and Illinois. Several million radium watches and clocks 
and instrument dials were made through World War II. The glowing numerals 
had to be hand-painted onto the watch dials, a delicate task deemed 
women's work. Claudia Clark, a professor of history at Central Michigan 
University who wrote ``Radium Girls'' (University of North Carolina 
Press, 1997), said the dial painters worked in ``studios,'' where 
they mixed their own paint from a powdered base. The workers, some 
as young as 15, painted about 250 dials a day for a cent and a half 
apiece, five and a half days a week. Within a few years, some of the 
young women became horribly ill from their exposure to radium, and 
some died. They have become a notorious chapter in the history of 
occupational disease. Clark estimates that 4,000 women were dial painters. 
Until sometime in the 1920's, the women were encouraged to use a technique 
called ``lip-pointing,'' which meant using their lips and tongues 
to shape their paintbrushes to a fine tip. Not only were their mouths 
and teeth bathed in radium all day, but the women probably swallowed 
and inhaled it as well, and they often went home so coated with radioactive 
paint dust that they glowed in the dark. Unaware of any risk, some 
painted their lips, teeth, eyelids, fingernails and the buttons on 
their clothes with the luminous solution. According to Clark, factory 
owners actually told the women that radium was good for them, and 
would make their cheeks glow. Meanwhile, more knowledgeable employees 
in other parts of the plant were beginning to use protective gear 
and shields when working with radium. And in 1921, while the dial-painting 
studios were in full swing, Marie Curie visited America and was presented 
with one gram of radium _ which was enclosed in a 110-pound, lead 
lined casket. The dial-painters' first health problems turned up in 
the 1920's, when some of the women began suffering from fatigue, anemia 
and trouble with their teeth. When dentists tried to extract the bad 
teeth, they were horrified to find jawbones so diseased that chunks 
of bone came out as well. The extraction sites did not heal, and infections 
set in. In many cases, the women's bodies were actually radioactive, 
because radium had been absorbed by their bones. Government researchers 
studied live and dead dial painters and used the data to calculate 
safe exposure levels for future generations of workers handling radioactive 
materials. By 1923, five young women from the Orange plant had died 
from a condition that came to be called ``radium jaw.'' The same thing 
had begun happening to dial painters in Connecticut and Illinois. 
As more time passed, some of the women developed bone cancers. What 
makes radium so dangerous is that it forms chemical bonds in the same 
way as calcium, and the body can mistake it for calcium and absorb 
it in the bones. Then, it can bombard cells with radiation at close 
range, which may cause bone tumors or bone-marrow damage that can 
give rise to anemia or leukemia. One radium girl who died was Margaret 
Looney, who died in 1929, at 24, after seven years of work at the 
Luminous Processes Plant in Ottawa, Ill. Her sister Jean Schott, who 
still lives in Ottawa, was only 6 when Looney died, but she remembers 
her mother rising at 5 every morning and walking a mile to the cemetery 
to visit the grave. ``Every family has sadness and grief,'' Schott 
said. ``Nobody gets by without it. But Margaret's death was unnecessary.'' 
The family sought compensation, but never received any. About 50 years 
after Looney's death, her family allowed researchers from Argonne 
National Laboratory, which maintains the dial painters' medical records, 
to exhume her body for study. Looney's bones, Schott said, were found 
to be highly radioactive. A series of free lectures and films titled 
``Marie Curie and the Centenary of the Discovery of Radioactivity'' 
will be offered Oct. 8 and 9 at the New York Academy of Medicine, 
and Oct. 10 at the New York Academy of Sciences. From October through 
December, a free exhibition on Marie and Pierre Curie will be on display 
in the lobby of the New York Academy of Sciences. For details, call 
212-838-0230, extension 410. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>