<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As state attorneys general on Tuesday start to review the outlines 
of a new national tobacco settlement proposal, even supporters of 
the plan acknowledge that it represents a new phase in the nation's 
debate over smoking: one of lowered expectations. The plan, which 
has not been completed, is expected to cost the tobacco industry more 
than $200 billion over 25 years and provide huge windfalls to the 
states which participate in it. But following a period when politicians 
and policymakers offered visions of a landscape swept clear of tobacco 
advertising and promotions, it is likely to strike many public health 
groups as inadequate. Even Christine A. Gregoire, the attorney general 
of Washington State who has led the eight states involved in the current 
negotiations, said recently that the proposal will probably fall short 
of public expectations. And as more details become known, they appear 
to underscore how strongly the momentum has shifted in favor of industry 
negotiators. The proposal, which seeks to be the basis of a nationwide 
settlement and will be reviewed Tuesday in New York City by a group 
of states believed most likely to oppose it, does contain steps to 
reduce cigarette consumption, particularly among young people. Among 
other things, it calls for a ban on billboard and transit advertisements 
paid for by tobacco producers as well as a ban on the sale of clothing 
and other merchandise with brand logos. The proposal includes $25 
million a year for 10 years for a new national foundation to look 
at ways of reducing teen-age smoking, one person briefed on the plan 
said. It also contains some $300 million annually over the next five 
years for counter-advertising and smoking-cessation campaigns, according 
to lawyers and others familiar with the plan. But the plan would allow 
companies to continue to use a number of marketing tools, including 
using human figures like the Marlboro Man in advertisements and placing 
promotional signs outside stores, apparently even in areas close to 
schools, several lawyers said. Each producer could have one major 
sports sponsorship and there would be no restrictions on print advertising. 
Some anti-smoking advocates said that while it is not known precisely 
how to reduce the numbers of teen-age smokers, the proposal allows 
producers too many marketing vehicles. ``The problem is that it leaves 
so many avenues open it is difficult to predict that it will have 
a positive effect,'' said Matthew Myers, a lawyer with the Campaign 
for Tobacco-Free Kids, a group in Washington, D.C. Officials of about 
10 states _ including Connecticut, Massachusetts, Maryland, Michigan 
and Wisconsin _ who are expected to review the plan on Tuesday, are 
calling for tougher public health measures and, in some case, more 
money. While the majority of states are expected to accept a new settlement 
proposal, if one emerges, the fate of the plan may rest with these 
10 states, which may decide to battle the companies in court rather 
than settle. An official of one of the states, who spoke on the condition 
of anonymity, said all states which decide to participate in a settlement 
will be offered a minimum of $1 billion regardless of their size or 
whether they sued the industry. Scott Williams, a spokesman for the 
industry, declined comment. Along with Washington, the states involved 
in the latest negotiations are California, Colorado, New York, North 
Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma and Pennsylvania. The tobacco companies 
involved are the Philip Morris Companies; R.J. Reynolds Tobacco, a 
unit of R.J.R. Nabisco Holdings; Brown &AMP; Williamson Tobacco, a 
subsidiary of B.A.T. Industries; Lorillard Tobacco, a subsidiary of 
the Loews Corp., and the smokeless tobacco producer U.S. Tobacco, 
a subsidiary of UST Inc. Under the $368.5 billion settlement plan 
negotiated last year between the tobacco industry and 40 state attorneys 
general, the industry agreed to advertising and marketing restrictions, 
ceding regulatory authority over nicotine to the government and paying 
fines if youth smoking did not fall. But that plan collapsed this 
year in Congress. And Gregoire said that because the current talks 
involve lawsuit settlements rather than legislation, state officials 
cannot force producers to yield regulatory authority or pay fines 
if youth smoking does not decline. The tenor of talks has also been 
markedly different this time. In recent months, many court decisions 
have gone in favor of the industry, and some of the officials involved 
in the current talks, such as Dennis C. Vacco _ the New York state 
attorney general, and Dan Lundgren, the California attorney general 
_ are involved in heated election campaigns and may see a tobacco 
agreement as benefiting them. While the debate last year focused largely 
on public health issues like government regulation of nicotine, the 
discussions this time have shifted to issues of concern to producers, 
such as how to deal with marginal cigarette makers who will not be 
parties to a settlement. Gregorie and others said the issue, which 
has consumed negotiators for weeks, is crucial because smaller producers 
may grow bigger and decide to play by their own rules. But some officials 
suggest that the real issue for negotiators should be industry giants 
like Philip Morris who are the subject of state lawsuits. ``What are 
the odds of someone who has less than 1 percent of the market gearing 
up to do battle with them?'' said one state official who spoke on 
the condition of anonymity. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>