<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0382 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With elections next month in 36 states, including the 8 most populous, 
this year's campaigns for governor will determine whether the Republicans 
maintain their remarkable hegemony in the nation's statehouses or 
the Democrats rebound from their catastrophic losses of the last four 
years. The outcome rests with more than a dozen fiercely competitive 
races, including those in California, where the lieutenant governor, 
Gray Davis, is trying to break the Republicans' 16-year hold on the 
state's top office, and here in Georgia, where Guy Millner, a businessman 
who lost two previous tries for statewide office, hopes to become 
the first Republican governor since 1868. In a year when the economy 
remains fundamentally sound and polls show that most Americans approve 
of the country's direction, the Republicans begin with the advantage 
of running 18 incumbents, compared with 6 Democratic incumbents and 
one independent, Gov. Angus S. King Jr. of Maine. And at the moment, 
polls show that Republican candidates hold leads, some of them seemingly 
insurmountable, in seven of the eight most populous states _ Texas, 
New York, Florida, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio and Michigan. The 
exception is California, where Attorney General Dan Lungren, the Republican 
nominee, is thought to be trailing Davis by a slim margin. The status 
of those races has given Republican strategists confidence that they 
will at least maintain their current count of 32 seats and possibly 
pick up a few more. ``I think it's safe to say that Republican governors 
may rival the National Park Service after this election in terms of 
their sheer control of land mass,'' said Chris Henick, a political 
consultant and former executive director of the Republican Governors 
Association. But Democrats are running unexpectedly strong races in 
states like Alabama, New Mexico and South Carolina, and if a few significant 
races break their way they could still reclaim a share of the turf 
that was ceded in 1994. ``It was a disaster for Democratic governors 
four years ago, so clearly we'd like to pick up some seats,'' said 
Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont, the immediate past chairman of the Democratic 
Governors Association. ``The rebuilding process is long and difficult. 
You've just got to outwork the opposition and get better candidates 
than they do.'' In the 1994 elections, the number of Republican governors 
soared to 30 from 19, the party's largest one-year gain since 1938. 
The Republicans lifted their tally to 32 in 1996, when they took control 
of governorships in Louisiana and Arkansas. Only once this century 
has the GOP exceeded its current count, and that was back in 1921-22, 
when it had 34 governors. The party has made similar gains in state 
legislatures and now control both houses in 18 states, an increase 
of 10 over 1994. Democrats have two-house majorities in 20 states, 
and 11 legislatures have each party controlling one chamber. (Nebraska 
has a unicameral and nonpartisan legislature.) In the last four years, 
with support from a devolutionary Congress, those Republican governors 
and lawmakers have left an unmistakable imprint on national policies 
on taxation, welfare, criminal justice and education. And if the Republicans 
hold or expand their trove of governorships, their dominance could 
become self-perpetuating after the next round of redistricting. Each 
of the governors elected on Nov. 3 will have veto power over the drawing 
of district maps after the 2000 census, giving them influence for 
a decade over the partisan makeup of the U.S. House of Representatives 
and of their own legislatures. And because many governors still exert 
considerable control over the political machinery in their states, 
the outcome of this year's races also could affect the organizing 
strength of the parties in the next presidential campaign. Some Democratic 
strategists said that their party was suffering now because it did 
not pay enough attention to building its second string in the years 
when it dominated gubernatorial politics. ``The Republicans have done 
a much better job developing the so-called B-team,'' said Harold Ickes, 
a former White House aide who now advises the Democratic Governors 
Association. ``I think we got sort of fat and lazy, if you will.'' 
The party also must contend this year with uncertainty over the turnout 
of its base voters, which could be depressed by demoralization over 
President Clinton's troubles. Studies show that turnout in non-presidential 
election years typically drops anyway, a phenomenon that tends to 
favor Republicans because their core supporters vote more reliably. 
Strategists in both parties said that most races for governor this 
year are being waged on local issues, not national ones, with candidates 
parrying over tax cuts, education reform, managed care, gun control 
and juvenile justice. But some Republican operatives are convinced 
that the White House scandal is having at least an indirect effect 
on Democratic campaigns. ``I've been amazed at how few of them are 
getting any traction,'' said Clinton Key, executive director of the 
Republican Governors Association. ``There's got to be a reason for 
it, and I think it's Clinton. Not in a specific sense but just as 
a general malaise.'' The ethical questions surrounding Clinton clearly 
have influenced strategy in a handful of states, including California, 
Maryland, South Carolina and Georgia, where candidates have been prompted 
to emphasize character, integrity and trust. Here in Georgia, for 
instance, the Democratic nominee, State Rep. Roy Barnes, has been 
broadcasting a television advertisement that attacks Millner on ethical 
questions, including being fined for failing to report contributions 
to a previous campaign. ``This year more than ever, character counts,'' 
the advertisement concludes. Not surprisingly, Millner has fired back 
with an advertisement of his own that criticizes Barnes for, among 
other things, getting in a shoving match with a prosecutor while defending 
a client in a criminal case. ``If character is the question, Roy Barnes 
isn't the answer,'' the advertisement maintains. Robert Kahn, Barnes' 
campaign manager, said he probably would not have opened the war on 
character were it not for Clinton's travails. ``I'm not sure we would 
have,'' he said. ``But it's certainly on everybody's mind.'' A poll 
conducted for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution last week gave Millner 
a lead over Barnes of 47 percent to 41 percent. The Republican incumbents 
in the strongest position include Govs. George Bush of Texas, George 
Pataki of New York, Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania and John Engler of Michigan, 
all of whom are far ahead in the most recent polls and are expected 
to cruise to victory. In the contest for Florida's open seat, a poll 
released last week showed Jeb Bush, a Republican who lost in the 1994 
governor's race, with a 15 percentage point lead over Lt. Gov. Buddy 
MacKay, the Democratic nominee. MacKay has had to contend with demoralizing 
defections from prominent black Democrats. And his campaign manager, 
Robin Rorapaugh, complained that her campaign could not break through 
the news media's obsession with the White House sex scandal. ``It 
puts so much clutter in front of voters that it's hard for a local 
candidate to talk about local issues,'' Ms. Rorapaugh said. Top Republican 
strategists, speaking on the condition of anonymity, say that the 
Florida race is all but over, and leading Democrats acknowledge that 
it is very uphill. ``Florida is, ugh, we have a major challenge,'' 
said Gov. Pedro Rossello of Puerto Rico, the chairman of the Democratic 
Governors Association. ``It's doable but time is running out.'' In 
Illinois, where Gov. Jim Edgar, a Republican, is retiring, the Republican 
nominee, Secretary of State George Ryan, has held a constant lead 
of 20 percentage points or more over his Democratic opponent, U.S. 
Rep. Glenn Poshard, for more than a month. In Ohio, where Gov. George 
Voinovich, a Republican, is retiring to run for U.S. Senate, the Republican 
candidate, Secretary of State Bob Taft, has a lead of just under 10 
percentage points in the most recent public polls over his Democratic 
opponent, Attorney General Lee Fisher. Democratic strategists maintain 
that internal polling shows that the race is tightening. Republicans 
also are heavily favored to maintain governorships in Arizona, Arkansas, 
Connecticut, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, 
Wisconsin and Wyoming. In Massachusetts, where the Democratic nominee, 
Attorney General Scott Harshbarger, has struggled to maintain party 
discipline, a poll released last week shows Acting Gov. Argeo Paul 
Cellucci, a Republican, with a lead of 11 percentage points. Democrats 
are expected to keep control in Alaska, New Hampshire, Oregon, and 
Vermont. In addition to Bush in Florida, GOP candidates are leading 
in several states where Democrats govern, including Hawaii, Nebraska 
and Nevada. Conversely, polls show that the Democratic candidate in 
Minnesota, Attorney General Hubert H. Humphrey 3d, is ahead in his 
campaign to reclaim that state for his party. But many major races 
remain neck-and-neck and are likely to stay that way until election 
day. In Maryland, for instance, polls show the incumbent Democrat, 
Parris N. Glendening, in a dead heat with Ellen Sauerbrey, the Republican 
legislator who lost the 1994 election for governor by 6,000 votes 
out of 1.4 million cast. In New Mexico, the former Albuquerque mayor, 
Martin Chavez, a Democrat, is waging a spirited campaign to wrest 
control from the Republican incumbent, Gov. Gary Johnson, in a race 
that strategists expect to be close to the end. The same is true in 
Alabama, although a poll taken late last week showed Lt. Gov. Don 
Siegelman, the Democratic nominee, with an expanding lead of 13 percentage 
points over Gov. Fob James Jr., a Republican who has become a national 
icon for school prayer advocates. The most surprising Republican vulnerability 
is in South Carolina, where public polls show that the Democratic 
challenger, Jim Hodges, has cut the lead of Gov. David Beasley to 
9 percentage points from 15 in the last month. Beasley is chairman 
of the Republican Governors Association, a job typically given to 
a governor who has few worries about his own re-election. Other close 
races can be found in Rhode Island, which features a rematch of the 
1994 campaign between Gov. Lincoln Almond, a Republican, and Myrth 
York, his Democratic challenger, and in Colorado, where State Treasurer 
Bill Owens, a Republican, faces Lt. Gov. Gail Schoettler. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>