<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0367 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Scott Mackie doesn't envy his old boss. Before he took over recently 
as head of General Motors Poland, Mackie worked at GM's big German 
unit, Opel, under David Herman. In June, GM dispatched Herman to Moscow, 
where he is now puzzling out a strategy in the wake of Russia's troubled 
collision with capitalism. Mackie, 37, has no such headaches. In August, 
right on schedule, a new $535 million GM factory in southern Poland 
came on line, and work is proceeding on a $300 million upgrading of 
a plant in Warsaw. To supply parts, GM's Delphi subsidiary has built 
or acquired six plants in Poland. A finance company set up last year 
feverishly plies Poles with credit to pay for the cars the plants 
churn out. Poland, in short, is not Russia. For some time now, Eastern 
European nations have been uncoupling themselves from their giant 
neighbor to the east and refocusing westward. And the breathtaking 
collapse of the Russian economy, which left Eastern Europe standing, 
served to banish all doubts that this trend is genuine. ``Today, Central 
and Eastern Europe's trade ties to Western Europe are far stronger 
than those to Russia,'' said Albrecht Schmidt, chairman of Bayerishce 
Hypo und Vereinsbank, one of Germany's largest banks. ``They have 
completely reoriented their economies to the West.'' True, stock markets 
in Warsaw, Prague and Budapest have taken a whipping because of the 
Russian debacle. Credit is harder to come by. But by and large the 
region sidestepped Russian-style woes, with Poland providing perhaps 
the most vivid example of the power to survive _ and even thrive. 
Not that all the pieces are in place. Mackie's Polish headquarters, 
in a corporate park erected hastily south of Warsaw after the fall 
of Communism nearly a decade ago, exudes impermanence. But he stresses 
that GM is in Poland for the long haul. ``Our ambition is to get not 
just a toe in the door, but a significant stake in the market,'' he 
said recently. ``We don't build plants with a 5-year horizon, but 
with a 30- to 40-year horizon.'' And that horizon clearly is to the 
West. The formation of a new government in Germany is now scrutinized 
more closely here than the assembling of a Cabinet in Moscow. ``They 
are all battered a little, and obviously they will face difficult 
access to international capital markets for some time,'' said Hans 
Peter Lankes, director of transition strategy at the European Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development in London. ``Yet you can see markets 
discriminating already.'' Polish companies have deftly exploited the 
opportunities that came with the collapse in 1989 of the old trading 
regime, Comecon, quickly establishing ties with Western Europe. The 
government took steps, at times haltingly and with mixed results, 
to overhaul creaking financial and industrial systems. And since Poland, 
unlike Russia, did not have vast sums lavished on it by the International 
Monetary Fund, it had to scramble for private cash, but the foreign 
money came. Partly, Poland made a virtue of necessity. Without Russia's 
natural resources like gold, oil and gas, Polish executives were largely 
unable to create the types of leveraged fortunes that have collapsed 
in Russia, accelerating the failure of that economy, experts say. 
In addition, government regulatory scrutiny of a kind unknown in Russia 
helped avoid excesses. ``Poland got off to a very good start'' by 
not succumbing to the fatal combination of bloated finances and real 
economic desolation that toppled Russia, said Jadwiga Staniszkis, 
a leading Polish sociologist, ``The temptations were similar, and 
the connections were there,'' she said, ``but the degree to which 
it happened was far less.'' As the largest Eastern European market, 
with 38 million people, and the region's principal motor of economic 
growth, Poland has many eyes on it, and it is not home free yet. With 
roughly 70 percent of its trade now conducted with Western Europe, 
a slowdown there would have ripple effects farther east. Fragile Polish 
industries now compete with hardened industrial old-timers from Europe, 
Japan and the United States, and the Poles must often use weapons 
still blunt from decades of mismanagement. Still, Poland, though besieged, 
continues to command international attention. The government is preparing 
big chunks of the nationalized economy, like the national telephone 
company and several large banks, to go public. The results will provide 
a gauge of global interest in investing here. Hugely unprofitable 
industries like coal and steel, with immense debts that are a drag 
on growth, are set for reorganization. Next year, the pension system 
will get an overhaul to avoid bankruptcy. While hedge funds and short-term 
speculators liquidated holdings in this summer's crisis, many investors, 
like GM, are committed for the duration. After years of managing funds 
in New York and Tokyo, Alicja Malecka returned to her native Poland 
in 1991 to build a fund business for the Pioneer Group, asset managers 
based on Boston. In 1994, Pioneer, which has $400 million of assets 
under management in Poland, less in Hungary and the Czech Republic, 
plunged farther east, establishing asset management and brokerage 
businesses in Russia as well. But Ms. Malecka's business epitomizes 
the region's contrasts. While she is bullish on Poland, she traveled 
recently to Moscow to sort out Pioneer's activities there. That operation, 
as she put it, was ``extremely successful until six months ago,'' 
but is now ``in a kind of survival mode.'' Not that Poland is all 
wine and roses. When Warsaw's stock exchange took a hit in 1994, she 
said, two-thirds of Pioneer's business melted away; this summer, when 
the market plummeted again, Pioneer's business shrank 20 percent as 
investors turned skittish. ``It's a very volatile market,'' Ms. Malecka 
said, seated in her office in a Communist-era tower that like Poland 
itself is undergoing a renewal. ``About 85 percent of our customers 
are individual investors.'' But change is coming. To rescue Poland's 
pay-as-you-go pension system, established under the communist regime, 
a new law takes effect in April that will require about 3.5 million 
Poles under the age of 30 to begin paying part of their earnings into 
private pension funds, and Pioneer expects to be among the dozen or 
so fund groups licensed for this business. Ms. Malecka is talking 
to about 400 companies, including big nationalized industries, about 
forming corporate pension plans to supplement the government's social 
security payments. ``Five years down the road, most of our assets 
will come from pension funds,'' she said. Mackie has seen similar 
changes help his business. Three years ago, he said, GM's forecasters 
were predicting a market in Poland of about 400,000 automobiles by 
2004. Yet they had not reckoned with changes in Polish laws enabling 
car makers to open consumer finance companies. Now, the market leader, 
Fiat, does 60 percent of its Polish sales through credit. By last 
year, total car sales had reached 477,000, and promise to be even 
higher this year. In fact, 280,000 cars were sold in the first six 
months, making Poland Europe's sixth-largest automobile market, after 
Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Spain. Doing business in Poland 
may not be easy, Mackie said, but it gets done. As do many Western 
executives, Mackie laments the Byzantine twists of Polish bureaucracy. 
In Gliwice, in southern Poland, site of GM's new plant, workers can 
use only one of several factory cafeterias, he said, since local officials 
have yet to issue sanitation permits for the others; the general contractor, 
a Polish construction group called Mostostal, performed technical 
miracles, he said, but was poor at efficiently organizing hundreds 
of subcontractors. Still, construction was fully on schedule, and 
on Aug. 31, the first cars rolled off Gliwice's assembly lines. Exactly 
when Poles' appetite for consumer goods like cars will be sated is 
hotly disputed. Consumer debt, despite offers like those by the auto 
companies, remains at less than 10 percent of disposable income, minuscule 
compared with levels in the United States and Western Europe. Yet 
growth in real wages is declining, to about 4 percent this year from 
6 percent in 1997, and figures suggest that growth of the crucial 
automobile market will slow to 7 percent this year, from more than 
25 percent in 1997. Thus, as attractive as Poland's domestic market 
may be, car makers like Mackie will use factories here to ship abroad, 
further cementing links with Western Europe. Though GM expects to 
sell about 45,000 cars a year in Poland, the assembly lines in Gliwice 
will churn out more than 150,000. All of Fiat's two smallest models 
sold in Western Europe come from factories in Poland. Polish auto 
workers earn 20 percent of the salaries of their Western European 
counterparts, and cars made in Poland enter Western Europe duty free, 
thanks to agreements to ease Poland into the European Union by early 
in the next century. To be sure, Poland is not isolating itself economically 
from the east, where millions of consumers in the forme Soviet Union 
offer a potentially huge and hungry market. Deputy Foreign Minister 
Radoslaw Sikorski pointed out how Poland had in recent months abolished 
visa requirements for Ukrainians and reduced visa fees for Russians, 
to $15 from $60, in part to stimulate barter-based cross-border trade 
that aids businesses in eastern Poland that supply consumer goods, 
like food, to Ukraine and Russia. As Russia heads toward a catastrophic 
harvest this year, he said, ``we think most of that will remain.'' 
But Poland's trade with Russia accounts for only about 7 percent of 
the total, he said, adding, ``We are closer to Brussels than to Moscow, 
and not only geographically.'' As economic reorganization produces 
increasingly close ties to Western Europe, it is there, economists 
say, that Poland's economic fortunes will eventually be decided. ``As 
long as there are clear signals that accession to the European Union 
is on track,'' said Lankes of the Reconstruction Bank, ``then Central 
European countries are going to be decoupled from emerging-market 
risks.'' Now, he said, the biggest question facing countries like 
Poland is ``what will happen to Western European economies, and there 
is increasing uncertainty about that.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>