<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton on Monday urged a select group of the world's top 
financial officials to develop a unified attack on the global economic 
crisis, after nearly three days of debate here have produced a near 
stalemate over immediate cures. Clinton spoke on Monday night at the 
beginning of a five-hour, closed session with finance ministers and 
central bankers from the largest industrial economies and 15 emerging 
markets nations that have been striken by currency devaluations, plummeting 
stock markets and growing unemployment. But the session on Monday 
night focused chiefly on long-term ideas for making the global economy 
less vulnerable to shocks, proposed by the United States and others, 
despite widespread criticism here that those meeting are spending 
too little attention on coordinated immediate action. Clinton returns 
to the arena on Tuesday morning, when he addresses the International 
Monetary Fund. It is holding its annual meeting here along with the 
World Bank. Clinton on Monday night echoed a lament heard often these 
days by politicians who feel whiplashed by the markets, saying that 
global capital markets ``can react swiftly and harshly when countries 
stray from sound policies.'' He added, `` the markets also can overreact, 
subjecting even countries following good policies to severe pressures.'' 
Just hours before Clinton opened the talks, the markets proved his 
point, continuing their fall around the globe. While the reasons varied, 
from heightened fears about Japan's banks to concern that it is taking 
too long to put together a huge package of aid for Brazil, the declines 
appeared set off by fears that the first few days of meetings here 
contained more finger-pointing than plans for action. Japan's stock 
market closed below 13,000 on Monday for the first time in 12 years 
_ further undercutting the financial viability of its banks _ and 
the Dow Jones industrial average also plunged, before recovering much 
of the day's loss. While officials seem to be reaching some consensus 
about preventing future turmoil, more fissures opened at Monday's 
meeting over how the world should respond, at a moment when the United 
States, the Europeans and the emerging-market nations all have different 
prescriptions. On Monday, for example, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin 
directly confronted Southeast Asian nations that have been pressing 
for _ and in a few cases enacting _ rules that would restrict the 
rights of investors to move money freely across national borders. 
``Misguided exchange and capital controls are not the answer for dealing 
with the effects of this crisis,'' Rubin insisted in a speech to the 
leading advisory panel to the World Bank. ``While the loss of confidence 
and resulting flight of capital from many emerging market economies 
has carried with it a heavy cost, measures that would effectively 
prevent the return of this capital will only postpone recovery and 
the restoration of economic growth.'' He was clearly referring most 
directly to Malaysia, which has not only imposed such controls, but 
also arrested and imprisoned the country's former finance minister, 
Anwar Ibrahim, an ally of Rubin's. Malaysia announced on Monday that 
it would suspend Anwar's trial, on charges of revealing state secrets 
and sodomy, until just after Clinton visits Malaysia next month for 
the next major meeting on the global crisis, involving leaders from 
around the Pacific Rim. Rubin also delivered a rare public rebuke 
to both the World Bank and the IMF, institutions created 53 years 
ago to stabilize the world economy, for their troubles in coming up 
with common solutions to the crisis. ``It is past time to put aside 
institutional rivalries unbefitting public institutions with the same 
shareholders,'' he said. ``The IMF and World Bank must evolve to meet 
the new demands of the global economy. All of us must work together.'' 
But among the thousands of delegates who moved through the meetings, 
wending their way from seminars on debt restructuring to glittering 
embassy receptions, criticism grew that Rubin and leaders of the other 
major economies should move more quickly to show they have a short-term 
plan. George Soros, the billionaire hedge fund manager, said in a 
forum sponsored by Foreign Policy magazine on Monday that ``the G-7 
should be shut in a room and not allowed to come out until they have 
reached a decision'' to extend loan guarantees and other backup financing 
to countries like Brazil that are ``essentially following the right 
policies.'' A year ago Soros was blamed by many at the IMF and World 
Bank meetings in Hong Kong for accentuating Asia's troubles by betting 
against its currencies _ an accusation he denied. But on Monday, he 
pressed his argument that countries have increasingly become slaves 
to the notion that markets are always right and self-correcting, declaring, 
``Right now, market fundamentalism is a greater threat to open society 
than any totalitarianism.'' In his public comments at least, Clinton 
has stepped around the sensitive issue of how much governments should 
intervene to contain market excesses. It is a territory where he is 
likely to bow to Rubin, a former Wall Street trader who is extraordinarily 
cautious about any moves that might smack of government efforts to 
restrict the free flow of capital. Instead, Rubin has pressed an agenda 
of long-term fixes to make the way countries handle their resources 
more transparent and to establish uniform rules when countries or 
companies cannot pay their debts. On Monday, several of those were 
endorsed in three reports issued by the G-22 _ a group of 22 countries 
that has turned into a think-tank about future economic crises. One 
called for the release of far more economic data by countries and 
companies alike, noting that the lack of such information ``exacerbated'' 
the panic that began in Asia last year. Thailand and South Korea, 
for example, both hid the depths of their problems last year. Another 
report endorsed changes in IMF strategy so that countries that could 
be hit by economic contagion _ a phrase that was rarely heard at these 
meetings until the Mexican peso crisis of 1995 _ can ``seek early 
assistance.'' That is the essence of a proposal Clinton made on Friday, 
but its success depends on the approval by Congress of $18 billion 
in additional funds for the agency. Republicans in the House of Representatives 
are overwhelmingly opposed, and there was no action Monday on resolving 
the House's differences with the Senate, which approved the commitment 
to the Fund more than a month ago. A final report on strengthening 
weak financial systems in countries around the world calls for a series 
of regulatory changes, including bankruptcy laws and established procedures 
to govern the restructuring of a nation's debt. In the present crisis 
that has been done on a case by case basis _ and in the case of Russia, 
the debt restructuring so far has been done largely by Russian decree. 
Many of these ideas have been in circulation for long enough now that 
they have begun to develop a momentum of their own. But they do not 
address the current crisis, and many of the officials here are complaining 
that Rubin and the IMF are focusing on rebuilding the hospital before 
they have treated some critically ill patients. But coordinated action 
is in short supply. The markets have been waiting to hear word of 
some kind of pre-emptive financial assistance for Brazil, totaling 
$30 billion or more, but while the details have largely been negotiated 
the Brazilian government is loathe to announce it until President 
Fernando Henrique Cardoso's apparent victory in a Sunday election 
is secured. And representatives of virtually all the major countries 
here, especially Asian nations, say they are still waiting for most 
signs that Japan is ready to deal with its banking crisis. The market 
drop in Tokyo today, just days after the lower house of Parliament 
passed the latest bill over dealing with the banks, suggested that 
investors believe Japan is still not doing enough. ``It's straightforward,'' 
said Kenneth Courtis, the chief economist for Deutche Bank's Asia 
operations. ``We've gotten from Japan all that we are going to get.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>