<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the epicenter of a financial earthquake that is roiling stock 
and bond markets around the globe, Greenwich is looking remarkably 
tranquil these days. At first glance, even the headquarters of John 
Meriwether's Long-Term Capital Management, the giant investment pool 
that threatened to go bust and take billions of dollars with it, was 
typically lush, leafy and well-landscaped. But a closer look revealed 
one hint of the unusual: a black office chair sitting in the middle 
of the driveway leading to the building. It turned out to belong to 
one of the guards whose job it was to shoo away the curious. Were 
those boxes of documents that were being loaded into the back of mini-vans 
in the parking lot? ``No comment _ you'll have to leave the property,'' 
is all the guards would say. And that's the way it is _ serene on 
the surface, reeling underneath _ all over Greenwich, which in recent 
years has become Wall-Street-by-the-Sea. Dozens of investment firms, 
run by money managers who have traded pinstripes for polo shirts, 
have settled in here, above Chinese restaurants and antiques shops, 
in empty office buildings and abandoned corporate headquarters. Some 
of the firms run mutual funds, some manage money for individual investors, 
some run hedge funds, which have recently become notorious because 
of Long-Term Capital's near collapse. The Federal Reserve arranged 
a bailout in which banks and brokerage firms put up hundreds of millions 
of dollars to keep it afloat. Only a handful of hedge funds are big, 
which in this world means they have assets of $1 billion or more. 
``There are 100 guys here managing less than $50 million,'' one money 
manager said. Hedge funds come in all different flavors _ risky or 
conservative, global or regional, stocks or bonds, or a little bit 
of everything. Some funds invest mainly in other funds, some buy oil 
rigs, bankrupt companies, or real estate. There are three things all 
hedge funds have in common: They are open only to the rich, they pay 
their managers a big slice of their profits, and they are not subject 
to government scrutiny, on the theory that millionaires can take care 
of themselves. To protect their investment strategies and to avoid 
giving the government the impression that they are trying to appeal 
to the general public, hedge funds tend to be highly secretive. Getting 
a manager to talk about a fund is next to impossible, even in the 
best of times. And these are far from the best of times, for almost 
every kind of investment fund, from the most conservative mutual fund 
to the most supercharged hedge fund. The Dow Jones Industrial Average, 
which measures blue chip stocks, has dropped more than 15 percent 
since early July, and some foreign markets are down by almost 50 percent. 
Managed Account Reports, which tracks about a dozen Greenwich hedge 
funds in its database of more than 1,000, reports that all but two 
of the Greenwich firms suffered losses in August. There is perhaps 
a touch of schadenfreude _ or more kindly, a feeling of ``there, but 
for the grace of God, go I'' _ behind the Greenwich financial set's 
fascination with the meltdown of Long-Term Capital. ``It's the talk 
of the town,'' said James P. O'Shaughnessy, a money manager and author 
who is starting a hedge fund of his own. At a recent parents' night 
at Greenwich Country Day School, he said, all the adults were asking 
how such a mess could have happened, and when the next shoe might 
drop. The rest of the time they were bemoaning their losses in far-flung 
financial markets, he said. Even the children in Greenwich are worried. 
Before choir practice at Christ Church, a 10-year-old girl asked, 
``Can we pray for the stock market?'' reported Kathleen Shelton Smith, 
whose child sings in the choir. ``Some of the other children laughed, 
but the little girl said, `It isn't funny,''' said Ms. Smith, a partner 
in Renaissance Capital, a research and money-management firm on Greenwich 
Avenue. Emotions in Greenwich may run particularly high right now 
because many people in town knew and liked Meriwether and his crew 
and find it hard to believe how wrong things went at his fund. Laszlo 
Birinyi, who used to work with Meriwether at Salomon Brothers and 
now has his own research and money-management firm in Greenwich, used 
to visit him for lunch at Long-Term Capital. ``It was one of the most 
boring operations you've ever seen,'' Birinyi said. ``Just a bunch 
of guys sitting there. You weren't even sure they were all awake. 
If it wasn't for CNBC on the television, you would have thought you 
were in a computer lab at Carnegie Tech.'' Greenwich has long been 
``the town the bull market built.'' Since the 1920s, Wall Street wheeler-dealers 
have built their mansions overlooking Long Island Sound and have commuted 
an hour into Manhattan. And until recently, there were no state income 
taxes. Greenwich has almost 60,000 residents, but it still looks like 
a village, albeit a rich one. Many office buildings are low enough 
to be hidden behind rustic stone walls and stands of trees. In the 
early 1990s, a lot of financial executives who lived in Greenwich 
realized that they could work there, too. Much business these days 
is conducted over the phone or by computer, and any meetings in Manhattan 
are only a short train ride away. There was no reason anymore to take 
the 6:02 five dawns a week to get to Wall Street by 7:30 a.m. ``I 
was commuting three hours a day,'' recalled William Smith, a Wall 
Street refugee who is president of Renaissance Capital. The realization 
that he was spending the equivalent of more than a month a year on 
the train was one reason he and his partners decided on Greenwich 
when, in 1991, they opened their research and money-management firm, 
which specializes in new stock offerings. Lower taxes were also a 
lure, several investment managers said, as were, until recently, lower 
real estate costs. Several large corporations, including American 
Can and United Parcel Service, moved out of Greenwich in the late 
1980s and early 1990s, leaving some big empty buildings where space 
could be rented for a relative song. And some buildings have amenities 
that Manhattan just cannot offer. Along Steamboat Road, the glass 
and concrete office buildings may look a little like bunkers, but 
they face Greenwich Harbor and have docks where tenants can tie up 
motor boats and small yachts. The area, the original home of Long-Term 
Capital and still the site of hedge funds like Ardsley Partners, grew 
so popular with money managers that it became known as Hedge Alley 
or Hedge Row. As more investment firms moved to Greenwich, more wanted 
to come. ``You certainly want to be in a community with other financial 
services firms,'' said Roberto Hunter, chief financial officer of 
Spectrum Capital, an investment bank that moved to Greenwich almost 
two years ago. ``We looked at just the right time,'' Hunter said. 
``Now there's practically no space _ though that could be changing 
as there is some shakeout in, and fallout from, hedge funds.'' Indeed, 
space is available at Long-Term Capital's own building, called Osprey 
House, which the firm owns. Signs on the building say 5,000 to 32,000 
square feet are available; the leasing agent did not respond to an 
answering machine message asking how long the sign had been up. Last 
year, at least seven investment firms moved into Greenwich and seven 
more moved to other parts of Fairfield County, according to the Business 
Council of Southwestern Connecticut. Stamford is most popular with 
large firms that need a lot of space, while Greenwich tends to draw 
the smaller operations that Wall Street calls boutiques, even if they 
manage hundreds of millions of dollars. Many are really one- or two-person 
operations, managing money for themselves and a few of their friends, 
but a few, like Long-Term Capital, are big enough for billion-dollar 
bets. Or were. Long-Term Capital once could borrow millions, but now, 
according to some talk around town, the firm can't get sandwiches 
on credit at the deli. Not so, said David LaRusso, who owns C &AMP; 
D Stateline Deli on West Putnam Avenue near Long-Term Capital's building. 
People from the firm come in every day, and ``no one ever asked me 
for credit,'' he said. ``I certainly would give it if they asked me. 
I sure wouldn't lend them a billion dollars, but they're very nice 
people.'' And as befits a place where investment jargon is the local 
lingo, LaRusso said he was sorry but not surprised by what happened. 
``It was a hedge fund, it was a gamble,'' he said. ``What do you expect?'' 
Not this financial debacle, say some of Greenwich's financial folks, 
who still cannot quite believe that a crisis that government officials 
say threatened world financial markets began in their quiet corner 
of the world, rather than Tokyo or London or New York City. Linda 
Killian, the third partner of Renaissance Capital, was only half-joking 
when she said: ``Who realized the epicenter of the financial disaster 
of the century would be here, right near the Starbucks?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>