<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0329 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Technology stocks fell sharply Monday, leading the stock market lower 
as the troubled world economy seemed to undermine investor sentiment. 
From Japan came the news that some Japanese officials think that their 
big banks are in much worse financial shape than previously thought. 
From Washington, where the world's financial leaders were gathered 
for the twice a year meeting of the International Monetary Fund and 
the World Bank, came no reassurance that world leaders would be able 
to act quickly to turn the situation around. ``It doesn't look like 
enough is going to be done fast enough,'' Jeffrey Applegate, chief 
U.S. strategist at Lehman Brothers, said. Three of the major stock 
gauges fell to within easy striking distance of their Aug. 31 lows, 
while the index of smaller company stocks breeched that low Monday. 
Foreign stock markets also ended lower, with Japan's Nikkei index 
down 2.08 percent to its lowest close in nearly 13 years. Brazil's 
Bovespa index was off 4.5 percent, despite the apparent re-election 
of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, who was leading in returns 
from Sunday's election. How fast Cardoso moves to cut government spending 
and work with the IMF on a backup rescue plan will be watched closely 
by investors, who fear that an economic collapse in Brazil would lead 
to a recession in the United States. As investors were shunning stocks 
they were rushing again into bonds, pushing yields even lower. The 
yield on the 30-year Treasury bond plunged to 4.72 percent and has 
now fallen 0.4 percent in the last week. But although stocks finished 
lower, a sharp, end-of-the-day rebound in the Dow Jones industrial 
average and the Standard &AMP; Poor's index of 500 stocks staved off 
a much steeper decline. The Dow, which was down almost 233 points 
finished off just 58.45 points, or 0.8 percent, at 7,726.24. The S&AMP;P 
index was off almost 38 points before rallying to close down just 
14.04 points, or 1.4 percent, at 988.56. The Nasdaq index, which is 
dominated by technology stocks, plunged 78.29 points, or 4.85 percent, 
to 1,536.69. Cisco Systems plunged 13.3 percent, Dell Computer was 
off 8 percent, Intel fell 3.95 percent and Microsoft declined 2.82 
percent. Part of the selloff was triggered by a report in The Washington 
Post Monday that the Federal Trade Commission was investigating whether 
Cisco had illegal conversations with Lucent Technologies and Northern 
Telecom about dividing up the networking market. Cisco confirmed the 
investigation. But selling pressure also seemed to come from the fear 
that a slowdown in the American economy would lead to a sharp decline 
in sales of networking and other Internet and computer products. This 
belief probably was aided by the warnings of several technology companies, 
including Aspen Technology and Avid Technology, that their third-quarter 
earnings would fall below expectations. Capital spending, which supports 
much of the computer industry, has been one of the strong foundations 
of the economy for the last several years. But there are signs that 
capital spending is beginning to slow. The recent sharp fall in the 
stocks of financial companies and the recent reports of their losses 
will further curb computer investment in this crucial area. If world 
leaders cannot reassure investors that they can contain the current 
financial crisis, investors will focus more and more on the possibility 
of the American economy finally tipping from slow growth into a recession. 
Applegate is not forecasting a recession yet but said that ``there 
is a growing chance of a pretty significant slowdown.'' With Stephen 
Slifer, the chief U.S. economist at Lehman Brothers, he is re-evaluating 
his outlook and said that ``all the numbers are going to be lower.'' 
This includes his forecast of 1,150 for the S&AMP;P 500 at the end 
of this year. Lawrence Meyer, a governor of the Federal Reserve Board, 
said in a speech Monday that the Fed cut its interest rate target 
last week by a quarter of a percentage point because the central bank 
believed the economy will slow next year. He said the cut was part 
of a strategy to allow the economy to slow with a soft landing, not 
a recession. Marshall Acuff, the equity strategist at Salomon Smith 
Barney, argued that ``the best case is slow growth next year, not 
a recession.'' And if that is the case, the Dow could stay above the 
7,400 level. But, he added, the odds for a recession are bigger than 
the odds for a sudden strong recovery. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>