<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0059 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gen. Henry Shelton is a good soldier. But smart salutes and muddy 
boots don't always take the hill, especially when it's Capitol Hill. 
Last week, Shelton and the other Joint Chiefs of Staff unexpectedly 
caught heavy fire from Senate Republicans, who berated the military's 
top brass for the sin of not speaking up sooner and louder about problems 
the officers say are eroding the Pentagon's ability to fight wars. 
``You were not candid to this member in the problems and challenges 
that we faced,'' snapped Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., and decorated 
Navy pilot who spent more than five years as a prisoner of war in 
North Vietnam. At first, the chiefs took a defensive crouch to wait 
out the volleys. But when senators still attacked their integrity, 
the four-stars hauled out their heavy artillery, and took aim at pet 
projects of Congress that the Pentagon doesn't want, and at unnecessary 
bases that lawmakers refuse to close. Bureaucratic disputes that generals 
and senators usually hash out in private suddenly got a very public 
airing. ``I am very concerned of the implication that the gentlemen 
at this table aren't being forthright and truthful,'' said Gen. Michael 
Ryan, the Air Force chief of staff. The tongue-lashing from the Armed 
Services Committee was even more startling because Republicans have 
long been the Pentagon's most ardent supporters. ``This is a committee 
that is an advocate for the United States military, no ifs, ands or 
buts,'' said Sen. Dirk Kempthorne, R-Idaho. So what prompted Republicans 
to turn their guns on trusted allies? For one thing, this is an election 
year, and Republicans have sought to portray the Clinton administration 
as weak on defense, saying it is burdening the military with too many 
foreign missions while shortchanging the Pentagon's budget. Republicans 
have also pointed to troubling signs of pilot shortages, aging equipment 
and training cuts for some time now. But those complaints lacked bite, 
because the chiefs had said the situation was tight but manageable. 
That is, until last week, when they complained in public before the 
senators. Taken aback, the Republicans were angry at the generals 
for not giving them an earlier opportunity to beat up on the White 
House over a juicy campaign issue. More broadly, conservatives felt 
the chiefs had violated an unspoken pact to side with them publicly 
on crucial issues, even if it means crossing the president, their 
commander in chief. Take the case of Gen. Colin Powell, Shelton's 
most famous predecessor, who looked like a soldier but was also a 
black-belt political infighter. Powell even punched his ticket at 
the White House with a brief stint as national security adviser to 
President Ronald Reagan. Powell's strong opposition to Clinton's plan 
in 1993 to allow homosexuals to serve openly in the armed forces was 
music to Republican ears. By contrast, Shelton, a commando with scant 
experience in the political minefields of Washington, has irked Republicans 
on other fronts. The chiefs have refused to endorse a Republican plan 
to build a system to defend the country against long-range missile 
strikes as soon as the technology is ready. Shelton says the threat 
does not yet warrant constructing such a system. To be sure, Republicans 
and the military have crossed swords before, only to make up, as most 
people believe they will this time. But that doesn't stop many Republicans 
from pining for the good old days with Powell. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>