<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0271 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is a warm, luminous day, and the prairies and woodlands of the 
Cedar Creek Natural History Area, 30 miles north of the Twin Cities, 
are buzzing with life. Crickets chirp. Bees and butterflies float 
from bloom to bloom amid scores of species of grassland plants carpeting 
the flatlands that run between groves of trees presided over by stately 
bur oaks two centuries old. The nine-square-mile tract, some of it 
undisturbed since before Europeans arrived in these parts, and some 
of it in various stages of recovery from decades of farming, is a 
fragment of the mosaic of tallgrass prairie and oak savanna that once 
covered great stretches of the country's midsection. But this swatch 
of the mosaic is special, as G. David Tilman, an ecologist at the 
University of Minnesota, is about to demonstrate. Tilman points to 
a brilliant green square on the ground that is thick with short, curly 
grass, much thicker and greener than the vegetation on neighboring 
plots. Intuition might suggest that the thick green plot represents 
the healthier chunk of the ecosystem. Not so, as Tilman has shown 
in one of scores of revealing and ambitious experiments _ the combination 
of their large scale and long duration may be unique _ for which he 
has become known. In this case, he added varying amounts of nitrogen, 
a powerful fertilizer, to different plots to determine the nutrient's 
effect on the ecosystem's functioning. It is a question of some import, 
since human activities like farming and the burning of fossil fuels 
are dumping nitrogen wholesale into the biosphere. Among the pearls 
of ecological evidence that have so far emerged from the Tilman experiments 
are these: _ As nitrogen rises, the number of plant species declines; 
the thick green grass, a species called quack grass, which happens 
to proliferate wildly in high-nitrogen soil, has crowded out other 
species in its plot. _ As the number of species declines, so does 
the total production of biomass, the amount of plant material as measured 
by dry weight. _ The decline in diversity of species also makes the 
impact of drought on the ecosystem much worse; the more species there 
are, Tilman says, the more chance there is that some will be drought-resistant. 
_ If enough nitrogen is added, it pushes the ecosystem into increasingly 
chaotic oscillations culminating in a crash of plant populations. 
_ When these high-nitrogen plants crash, die and decompose, more nitrate 
leaks into the soil and then into ground water and surface runoff, 
possibly impairing water quality and promoting harmful blooms of algae. 
The main message sent by these results, Tilman says, is that the more 
species there are in an ecosystem (up to a point), the more productive, 
resilient and stable it will be. This is a question of some importance 
for conservation policy, given a running political debate over whether 
it is important to preserve as many species as possible. But the Tilman 
experiments may have an even more basic value to the young science 
of ecology. Controlled experimentation _ in which the experimenter 
essentially attempts to hold all variables constant except the one 
whose effect is being tested _ is routine in many sciences, but until 
relatively recently it had not been widely employed by ecologists. 
Even now most such ecological experiments are small and short. Tilman 
thinks big and long-term: His manipulations of the prairie-savanna 
ecosystem have involved some 140 experiments over the last 17 years, 
with scores to hundreds of plots in each experiment and many of the 
investigations lasting for years. About 35 are now in progress. What 
Tilman often does, said Stuart Pimm, an ecologist at the University 
of Tennessee, is take a snippet of an idea that may have been around 
for a while and subject it to ``an incredibly well-replicated and 
thought-out experiment, and you say, `Yeah, that's it, he's nailed 
that one down.''' ``It makes it very compelling, very exciting,'' 
Pimm said. Peter Kareiva, an ecologist at the University of Washington, 
in Seattle, said many scientists would not even attempt Tilman's work. 
``They say it can't work, it's too complicated, or there are too many 
confounding factors in the experiment,'' Kareiva said. But Tilman 
is an ebullient optimist _ words pour from him in a torrent of enthusiasm 
_ and Kareiva says it is this optimism that drives the ambitious experimentation. 
Tilman's goal is to help make ecology a rigorous mathematics-based 
discipline like, say, physics. He wants to reduce the principles of 
ecosystem function to mathematical equations that scientists can use 
to predict how nature will behave under varying conditions. Success 
in this effort would be a boon to ecology, where efforts to conserve 
and restore natural landscapes are often based more on educated guesswork 
than on firmly delineated and codified scientific principles. Many 
other ecologists doubt that the complexities of ecology can ever be 
reduced to a few general principles. Tilman believes they can, and 
his method, a classic one in the hard sciences, is to formulate a 
theory (expressed graphically in this case), reduce it to equations, 
then test it on the ground at Cedar Creek. Usually, he says, the theory 
turns out to be partly right and partly wrong. So then it is is time 
to reformulate the theory. And so on. Many associates praise Tilman's 
willingness to experiment and to risk being wrong so boldly. ``Dave 
does not lack for guts in terms of putting his money where his mouth 
is,'' said Mark Schwartz, a former Tilman student who is now an ecologist 
at the University of California at Davis. Tilman himself sees the 
question of sometimes being wrong a little differently. For him, the 
part of the theory that turns out to be wrong opens the way to further 
understanding. ``Where things fall apart,'' he says, ``is where I 
get excited.'' Tilman, 49, started out to be a physicist. But in his 
undergraduate years at the University of Michigan in the late 1960s, 
he came to believe that the biggest and most interesting questions 
in physics had already been answered. What to do? He had always had 
a love of biology and of the natural world. As one of four children 
growing up in a beach home near St. Joseph, Mich., he went to sleep 
to the sound of Lake Michigan lapping the shoreline. In Little League, 
where he was not a bad player, his teammates called him the Professor; 
he was often less interested in the game than in the flowers and bugs 
in the outfield. So it was natural that his search for an alternative 
to physics should lead him to biology, and in turn to ecology, a science, 
he says, that ``reminded me of what it must have felt like to have 
been Newton or others back in the early days of physics.'' In ecology, 
big questions still remained unanswered; masses of information from 
the field awaited rigorous analysis and a theoretical framework to 
explain it. And there was the added bonus of ecology's role in helping 
preserve the environment. For his doctoral thesis at Michigan, he 
plunged immediately into the world of experimental ecology. Intrigued 
and disturbed by the growth of algae in Lake Michigan, he studied 
the response of scores of the lake's different algal species to their 
two main nutrients, phosphate and silicate. He tested each species 
in the laboratory and found that each required a different ratio of 
the two nutrients. In 1976, at the age of 26, he arrived at the University 
of Minnesota with his wife, Cathie (they now have four children, aged 
9 to 21). Within a week of taking up his position as an assistant 
professor, he was walking around the grasslands of Cedar Creek, and 
soon concluded that the prairie was even better than a lake for investigating 
the relationship between nutrient amounts and species diversity: ``Soil 
sits there year after year,'' he says, ``and you can measure exactly 
what a plant is experiencing.'' From the start, his experiments focussed 
on the basic mechanics, as it were, of ecosystem functioning. His 
underlying assumption was (and is) that the structure of ecosystems 
is controlled by two major processes: interaction between consumers 
and the resources they consume (plants and nutrients, for instance, 
or predators and prey) and the recycling of nutrients (as in decomposition 
of dead material). And so Tilman and his fellow experimenters set 
to work, dividing expanses of ground into control and experimental 
plots, blocking them off from each other when necessary, and then 
manipulating variables like species composition, nutrients and soil 
fungi. The main focus of the experiments has been on what controls 
diversity of species and how diversity affects the functioning of 
ecosystems. The largest, most rigorously controlled test, now under 
way, is called BioCon. It involves 340 experimental plots on 20 acres 
of Cedar Creek land. In 1993 the experimenters employed road scrapers, 
plows and disks to scrub the plots (they had once been farmland) clean 
of weeds and invasive species. Then they seeded the plots with native 
prairie plants, varying the number of species from 1 to 32 per plot 
and choosing the species in each plot at random. The plan is to follow 
all the plots for several years and record the abundance of each species 
through time. ``These experiments are slow,'' Tilman says. ``It's 
five or so years before you trust many of the results.'' That is, 
until the components settle into some sort of long-term equilibrium, 
they may send false signals about how the ecosystem works. The researchers 
are also investigating a number of ecosystem dynamics. Does diversity 
make a difference in plants' susceptibility to disease, for instance? 
There is reason, Tilman says, to believe that low diversity increases 
vulnerability. The idea is that the lower the diversity, the more 
abundant are the plants of any one species, and the closer they are 
together, allowing disease _ in this case, fungal diseases _ to spread 
from one plant to another. At one plot, a doctoral candidate, Charles 
Mitchell, was picking through a thick stand of little bluestem grass, 
estimating the percentage of leaves and leaf area covered by the telltale 
brown-rust spots of fungal disease. He had already looked at thousands 
of plants and was entering the data as he collected it on the keyboard 
of a hand-held computer. (Twenty years ago, notes Tilman, the lack 
of computer capacity would have made it impossible to analyze the 
mass of data he and his students are collecting.) A few yards away, 
perhaps a dozen people weeded plots to keep the experiments from being 
clouded by invasive plants. And in one spot, whooshing, computer-controlled 
jets of air loaded with carbon dioxide continually adjusted the amount 
of the gas flooding an experimental plot to keep it at about double 
the pre-industrial concentration. Here, the idea is to manipulate 
both carbon dioxide and nitrogen, two chemicals with which humans 
are flooding the biosphere, to determine their combined effects on 
plant diversity. There are many more variables being looked at as 
well, and the lush, unruly, highly complex mixture of plants that 
make up the prairie at Cedar Creek vividly raises the question of 
whether it is really possible, out in nature, to control everything 
that needs to be controlled in a valid way. Schwartz notes, for instance, 
that weeding the plots changes the amount of biomass in them, and 
this, he says, introduces an experimental weakness. Other scientists 
say that hidden variables, unrecognized and unaccounted for by the 
experimenter, may produce misleading results. ``You just can't control 
everything,'' Schwartz says. Moreover, he is one of those who questions 
whether it is possible to boil ecosystem behavior down to a few relatively 
simple mathematical equations. The attempt to do so, he said, is ``good 
for ecology, but I also think it's realistic to think it may be more 
complicated than that.'' Pimm, the Tennessee ecologist, for one, believes 
it is better to try ``than just to throw your hands up and say it's 
impossible.'' And in fact, he said, ``David has shown that a lot of 
the things we thought were impossible can be reduced to patterns.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>