<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981005.0240 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Getting refunds on the value added tax, or VAT, in Europe is getting 
harder. It's not knottier mathematics. That's the same old challenge 
to those of us who hated eighth-grade arithmetic. But new problems 
are being created by the softening of borders within the European 
Union. It's more difficult for travelers to do the paperwork for tax 
refunds on major items being taken home because the tax chits are 
supposed to be validated at the last stop in the Union, no matter 
where the purchases were made. To review basics: European value-added 
taxes range from 6.5 percent in Switzerland to 25 percent in Denmark 
and Sweden. For a VAT refund, most countries require the foreign visitor 
to spend a minimum amount in one store, usually on one visit and sometimes 
on one purchase. Some rough sample minimums are $340 in Switzerland, 
$210 in France, $180 in Italy and $50 in Britain. Ireland has no minimum. 
Ask the store what the minimum is. And refunds always seem to be less 
than you expect. Here's why: The tax is not broken out but integrated 
into a price. For example, a Paris scarf with a price tag of $300 
was originally about $248; adding the French VAT of 20.6 percent brings 
it to $300. Refunding the VAT will thus yield only $51.30, or 17.1 
percent of the marked price. If a refund company is used, it takes 
a bite averaging 3 percent of the price of the item. For the $300 
scarf, this would mean a net refund of $42.30, about 14.1 percent. 
The sales clerk will fill in this amount on the tax receipt. Then, 
at the airport, if the traveler wants a refund in dollars instead 
of in francs or instead of a credit to a charge card, the exchange 
company will charge a fee. Now, the new problems. The 15 members of 
the European Union have had a rule since Jan. 1, 1993, that VAT receipts 
may be validated and refunds obtained only at the last stop in the 
Union, whether at an airport, a road customs stop or on the railroad 
border check. This rule is now being enforced in many places. In a 
simple scenario, a traveler who has visited Spain, Portugal and France 
and is now flying back to the United States from Germany presents 
the refund slips from everywhere for validation at German customs. 
The officer stamps the receipts and the traveler turns them in at 
a refund booth, or uses an attached envelope to mail them. Or they 
can be mailed from home. An increasingly likely scenario was experienced 
by Robert Smith of Baltimore. Leaving Spain with some silver pieces 
on his way to London and home, he asked the Spanish customs agent 
to stamp his slip for a refund of $75. Smith was told he could get 
his refund only at his departure point from the European Union. When 
Smith protested that he would have only two hours to connect in London, 
the guard waved him out of the line. As it later turned out, Smith 
missed his London connection, and stayed there overnight. So he got 
his receipts stamped but would otherwise probably have been out of 
luck. A company called Global Refund, formerly known as Europe Tax-Free 
Shopping, is the major third-party agent for refunds. It says 125,000 
retailers in 22 countries are linked to Global Refund; labels on their 
windows say ``Tax Free for Tourists.'' When a refund is processed, 
Global Refund keeps an average of 3 percent of the retail price of 
the item _ about 10 to 20 percent of the refund. At 400 airport kiosks, 
often shared with a currency exchange company, it accepts the stamped 
receipts, which it calls cheques. It gives an immediate cash refund 
in local currency, or in the currencies used for the purchases. Or 
it can apply a credit to a charge card _ American Express, Diners 
Club, JCB, Eurocard-Mastercard-Access or Visa. This will emerge in 
two or three billing cycles as a credit in dollars. If a dollar refund 
is sought on the spot, the fee from the exchange company is deducted 
from the refund. Global Refund, a division of the Cendent Company 
with headquarters in Stamford, Conn., estimates that Americans lose 
$50 million a year in unclaimed refunds. Julia Ryan, the American 
marketing director for Global Refund, said that problems like the 
one in Madrid led her company to negotiate with customs officials 
at airports in the European Union to make it easier to get validations 
at interim stops. One result, she says, is an unwritten two-hour rule: 
The customs official may validate the receipt if the tickets show 
that the connection time at the last stop in the Union is no more 
than two hours _ the usual minimum connection time airlines book internationally. 
``The final decision to stamp is up to the local customs authority,'' 
Ms. Ryan says. In most such cases, the customs officer will want to 
see the items, which means they should be packed in the top of any 
suitcase being checked through, or the parcel should not be so well 
wrapped that scissors and knives are needed to open it. If time is 
ample, and the customs official cooperative, the goods can be inspected, 
the VAT form stamped and the luggage checked through to the United 
States. Allowing enough time to be pleasant is probably a help with 
customs agents, Ms. Ryan said. There are dozens of wrinkles. For example, 
in Germany, Italy and France, customs officials will stamp the form 
for checked items only, not for those being carried aboard the plane; 
passengers must get this validation at the last stop in the Union. 
The situation is particularly difficult if passengers are connecting 
to a nonstop flight to the United States at Charles de Gaulle Airport 
near Paris. All of the customs desks are at the check-in area, outside 
the security barrier. If a VAT stamp is needed, it will thus take 
extra time. To avoid this snarl, Ms. Ryan said, her company is encouraging 
customs officials in other places to provide validations to passengers 
going through Paris on their way home. The stamped receipts are then 
taken to an area labeled ``Detaxe'' for the refund inside the security 
barrier. Where travelers are passing through an airport for the last 
leg home, checked luggage is already in the custody of the airline 
and cannot be inspected. But the need for local customs officers to 
verify that the objects are leaving the European Union is satisfied 
by the air tickets and stubs of luggage checks. Switzerland, outside 
the European Union, is the source of many failed refund requests, 
Ms. Ryan said. The Swiss customs officers will stamp receipts only 
for purchases made in Switzerland, conversely, these receipts cannot 
be stamped in a Union country. Ms. Ryan said her company's offices 
in Switzerland got a high percentage of unvalidated receipts from 
United States residents. Leaving Switzerland by train, where there 
may be no customs check, is part of the problem. In this case, the 
receipt, plus a copy of a train ticket, may be mailed to the company 
for a refund. Ahead is the euro currency to be used by 11 countries 
in the European Union. Global Refund is getting set to give euro refunds, 
too _ providing a more widely usable currency without exchange fees. 
Global Refund is at 707 Summer St., Stamford, Conn. 06901; (800) 566-9828 
or www.globalrefund.com. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>