<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981005.2000.0685 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On one foreign policy crisis, the Clinton administration is not waiting 
for congressional guidance. The White House has been acting in concert 
with NATO in threatening air strikes against Serbia, unless it ends 
its seven-month conflict with the ethnic Albanian majority in Kosovo 
and ends repressive actions against civilians in the province. The 
president's Balkans envoy, Richard Holbrook, met today with Slobodan 
Milosevic in Belgrade. Holbrook asked the Serbian leader to take what 
one diplomat called irreversible verifiable steps to diffuse the crisis. 
The world's Nenol Shelbeck in Belgrade says Holbrook is the right 
man to deliver that message. Holbrook and Milosevic know each other 
very well indeed. They even appear to have some kind of a rapport 
between them and there is one western diplomat who knows for example, 
when Milosevic is bluffing and when not, when to push, when to give 
some ground. That's Richard Holbrook, known in the diplomatic field 
as the bulldozer. Let's remember that he was the guy who pushed through 
the Dayton peace accord and he's dealt, more than anyone else, with 
Mr. Milosevic. If there's anyone who can bring him about, that is 
Richard Holbrook. Well, is there a feeling that indeed that will be 
the case, that as lightening can in a sense strike twice in the same 
relationship? It's quite possible, although it's difficult to see 
sort of what more ground can Milosevic concede. He has complied with 
a number of demands made by the United Nations Security Council. It's 
now a question of verifying because Milosevic has no credit in the 
west, no credibility left over. Basically anything he claims or that 
his government claims because everyone knows that it's only one man 
making all the decisions in Serbia and Yugoslavia, not the government, 
has to be verified. The latest move that has been made is that an 
admission by the OSCE, the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe, has been invited to come to Yugoslavia, to Kosovo, to verify 
what Mr. Milosevic is saying which is that he actually has complied 
with most of the demands. If Mr. Holbrook is the last and best hope 
of the west to deal in a peaceful manner with Mr. Milosevic, how much 
time are both sides seeming to be giving this latest attempt? Well, 
most of the dealings are actually wrapped in secrecy, but apparently 
it would appear as if Holbrook is going to give Mr. Milosevic very, 
very, very little time indeed. He's going to set very strict deadlines. 
He's going to ask for very, very specific demands and he wants to 
see that done sort of right now. Mr. Milosevic is well known for stalling, 
well known for trying to buy time, so this time I think the west is 
determined not to let him get away with it. And this is a fact, if 
it is a fact, that the people of Belgrade are also aware, well aware 
of, that the next thing that comes out of a plane if things don't 
work is likely to be a bomb. So how are the people of Belgrade preparing 
for that possibility? People are very much afraid. There was an earthquake 
here in Belgrade a week ago, just after midnight and most of the population 
thought, my God is this an earthquake or is this NATO bombing? Actually 
all the talk on the streets is about will NATO come and bomb Serbia? 
People feel that such a threat is unjustified. They feel that the 
Serbs are not being treated fairly, but I'll say that the opinion 
is divided. About half of them are willing to sort of concede and 
make some concessions although nobody's prepared here to give away 
Kosovo outright. And how is the government making its case to the 
people of Serbia? Well, it's been beating the war drums lately. For 
example, the regime has joined these discussions in a way by broadcasting 
patriotic songs like this one for example on the main state-run television 
before and after all newscasts. That almost has kind of western flavor 
to it, although I would imagine not a very pro-western sentiment. 
What are they saying in that song? It's a patriotic song and the lyrics 
go along the lines of we love you fatherland and with your army, your 
future is secure. As the music is playing the television is showing 
pictures of sailors on their warships off Mig-29 fighter planes soaring 
through the skies above Yugoslavia, children running along happily 
in the fields, the usual kind of patriotic whipping up patriotism 
in the ways done basically anywhere in the world. The world's Nenot 
Shelbeck reporting to us from Belgrade, Yugoslavia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>