<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981005.2000.2995 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the world. I'm Tony Kahn. When Asia's economies went bust, 
Americans started worrying. When Russia's ruble ruptured, things got 
a little scarier. The next potential domino to fall could be crucial. 
If Brazil's economy collapses, all of Latin America would probably 
not be far behind and U.S. economic interests would take a severe 
hit. Today, officials with the International Monetary Fund said Brazil 
is moving closer to securing a financial aid package that will help 
the South American country ride out the storm. Brazilian voters this 
weekend apparently decided that President Fernando Enrique Cardozo 
is the man to lead them through their economic crisis. With more than 
60 percent of yesterday's votes counted, the incumbent does have a 
17 percent lead over his nearest challenger. But the BBC's Lucio Mesquita 
senses mixed feelings about that in Sao Paulo. There's a very strange 
moment for Brazilians here now, because they're not terribly happy 
with the government. They are not terribly happy with the way the 
economy's going. There is this financial crisis as threatening Brazil. 
So I don't think you'll see a lot of parties or people full of joy 
on the streets saying that's fantastic. We have another four years 
of President Cardozo. They're just saying that he is the best man 
to deal with the crisis right now. So why not go give him some credit. 
In a sense the crisis you're referring to is a crisis that every nation 
in the world is facing now, the economic crisis. The financial fire 
and meltdown seems to be affecting every economy. In the case of Brazil, 
it's a David and Goliath kind of situation. Are the people who are 
voting for Cardozo voting for him because they're personally not blaming 
him for having gotten Brazil in the way of this or because they think 
he can actually solve the problem. Well, some analysts here will say 
that the government has been very efficient the world or maybe it's 
blaming Asia and Russia for the crisis they're facing here now in 
Brazil. They're not saying that maybe some of their economic policies 
were not quite right and that the situation, but basically what people 
are saying here is that, well, we have the crisis now. We have sort 
out the problem and the problem is some help from financial institutions 
abroad and that the man who can deal with that, so maybe the left 
wouldn't be able to do that so much. That's pretty much what's coming 
out of the polls. But it's good to remember as well that the government 
is not doing so well in the state elections and also the elections 
for Congress. So somehow they're punishing the government but leaving 
President Cardozo as the president for another four years. So it can 
be actually quite complicated, because when he has come up with some 
reforms that try to sort out the economy, he may find a quite hostile 
Congress to deal with. Well, what could he do, assuming he did have 
the power to do something and he did have the agreement of the Congress, 
would there be tax hikes for the wealthy? Would there be sweeping 
spending cuts that would affect people who have less. I think both 
of these two options. Basically what really does expecting to see 
coming out of the government soon will be maybe a tax reform, so the 
country has so many tax that people are completely bogged down by 
the situation and basically there are lots of tax evasion because 
of this. That's one thing they have to tackle. But you can as well 
and that of course will probably bring a strong recession. Most of 
the economists they talk to here they're just how deep the recession 
will be, but certainly there's very little doubt that there's some 
recession coming ahead for Brazil. In a sense, he is standing perhaps, 
Mr. Cardozo, in the shadow of the IMF, could be an ally of his. Is 
he likely to do what the IMF has been calling for, those tax hikes, 
those sweeping spending cuts. He might not have a lot of choice. If 
he needs the money coming from IMF, he may have to do that and then 
we have a very tricky situation, because IMF was here in the '80s 
and it wasn't a very happy time for Brazilians. And they see the IMF 
with a lot of suspicion. And President Cardozo will have a very difficult 
task to convince Brazilians that this time, the IMF is coming here 
for something good to keep the economy stable and to make Brazil grow 
again sometime in the future. So that will be his main task, to try 
to sell any packaging IMF in a good way for most Brazilians. We've 
been speaking with the BBC's Lucio Mesquita in Sao Paulo. Thank you. 
Thank you Tony. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>