<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981005.2000.2380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States is one of the world's most vocal governments in 
the promotion of human rights around the world, but tomorrow America 
will find itself on the receiving end of a critical report. Written 
by the London-based human rights organization Amnesty International. 
The survey is especially blunt in its assessment of the U.S. criminal 
justice system and the conduct of American police officers. Curt Gerring 
is the deputy director of Amnesty USA, based in New York. Mr. Gerring, 
prior to our reading it tomorrow, why don't you let us have it? What 
specifically does the report focus on here in the United States in 
terms of human rights abuses? Well, the report focuses on a number 
of serious human rights violations that we've documented over the 
years, including police brutality, prison and jail conditions. There 
will be a section on the situation of asylum seekers being held in 
county jails, the death penalty and the way that penalty is used in 
the United States. Well, give me some examples, chapter and verse 
here of the accusations and charges that you're going to be leveling 
in the report. We're talking about the introduction and the widespread 
use now of electric shock technology or weaponry that's making its 
way into the criminal justice system here in the U.S. There are more 
than dozens of prisons that are using electric shock weaponry, stun 
belts for example are being used and when it's activated, there a 
shock of 50,000 volts that enters the body through the left kidney 
and then instantaneously through the circulatory and nervous systems 
and this results in instant incapacitation and sometimes self urination 
or defecation. Now your organization is certainly well known for making 
reports of this kind in countries that are far more dictatorial and 
with atmospheres that are far more toxic to human rights than the 
United States. Why have you concentrated on the United States when 
there's so much still to be done elsewhere that's one can argue is 
much worse. Well, the reason we're concentrating here now is because 
there are serious and persistent human rights violations in this country 
and we are now taking some time to focus and concentrate on the role 
that the U.S. plays in promoting human rights internationally but 
also the United States in fact has been an obstacle to the development 
of international human rights standards in some respects in recent 
years. One only has to look at the performance and the role that the 
U.S. delegation played at the international criminal court conference 
in Rome. The U.S. is now actively signing the treaty to ban child 
soldiers. The U.S. did not play a constructive role in the signing 
of the land mines treaty last December in Ottawa. And these are just 
three examples where the U.S., far from being a strong promoter of 
human rights, has raised very serious questions about its commitment 
to them. What do you say to people who argue that well, this report 
like yours really does undermine the diplomatic effectiveness and 
the behind the scenes effectiveness of the United States in pressing 
for human rights in other countries if it's so open to criticism by 
your own organization. Well, I mean what we're pointing out are real 
live examples are the reality of what's happening in the United States 
today behind prison bars, within police departments. We're bringing 
this attention to light. So if there is some criticism to be lowered, 
it has to be at those officials responsible. The police departments 
or the Justice Department in some cases that know these kinds of violations 
exist and yet, haven't taken strong or effective or forceful enough 
action to put a halt to them. Given that this is the U.S., who do 
you think would be the most important readers of your report in terms 
of actually getting something done? If the attorney general, Janet 
Reno, took a look at the report and took a look at the recommendations 
and would order her department to say, look. We're going to study 
these. We're going to try to implement one through four. That would 
be a very significant and a very important step forward. After all, 
what for we're asking for in terms of some of what our recommendations 
are is that the laws which are already on the books in the United 
States, the police accountability provisions of that, be funded. So 
Janet Reno should ask for and Congress should agree to the funding 
of that portion of the crime bill. And that would send a very important 
signal to the institutions of justice throughout the society that 
we take these abuses seriously. There is the political will to deal 
with them and we're going to put a halt to some of this. Mr. Gerring, 
thanks a lot. Curt Gerring is the deputy executive director of Amnesty 
U.S.A. based in the New York. Thanks Tony. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>