<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981005.2000.1255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the world. In Boston, I'm Tony Kahn. Ah, October. The chill 
in the air, clear sunlight through the turning leaves and of course, 
the sound of championship baseball. Now since we last spoke to you, 
the four teams who will battle for the right to represent their league 
in the World Series, much to Boston's regret, have been decided. New 
York and Cleveland in the American League and Atlanta and San Diego 
in the national. The coaches, the players, the fans are into the season's 
heavy analysis stage, pronouncing the keys to the games and fearlessly 
forecasting the results. But one school of thought has it that it 
really all boils down to science. As Clark Boyd reports, the latest 
baseball research into the art of hitting actually comes to us from 
the other side of the world. It was the sports story of the summer. 
Mark McGwire tagging towering home runs into the nether reaches of 
baseball stadiums around the country, all the while being pursued 
by Sammy Sosa. McGwire and Sosa make swatting four-baggers look easy. 
But most great hitters will tell you that it's one of the hardest 
things to do in professional sports. Ah, but when you do connect, 
the feeling can be great. Take Mark McGwire's reaction when he belted 
number 62, breaking Roger Maris' single season home run record. Well, 
when I hit the ball, I saw it you know, it was on a line drive and 
you know, I thought it was going to hit the wall and the next thing 
you know it disappeared. I looked up and David Kay was jumping up 
and sort of like just one big thing, touch first base. So, but I tell 
you what, I'll always remember that and it was a sweet, sweet run 
around the bases. That sweet, sweet run around the bases has long 
been attributed to the hitter finding the ball with the sweet spot 
of the bat. Baseball loving physicists have invested a lot of time 
and money trying to figure out how this sweet spot really works. There's 
even one Australian who's trying to figure out the science behind 
America's national pasttime. I went out and bought a Louisville Slugger, 
I think it was and I wanted to investigate what the sweet spot was 
on a baseball bat. Rod Cross, physics professor at the University 
of Sidney, says he's found two sweet spots. One is, there'll be a 
spot on the bat when you hit the ball, the ball will come off the 
bat with maximum speed. So you'd like to know where that spot is to 
get the ball out of the fence. But there's another totally unrelated 
to the first one and that is, if you hit the ball at the sweet spot, 
it'll feel nice. You won't feel any jarring or any stinging in the 
hands or the arms when you hit the ball at the sweet spot. Cross recently 
finished experiments designed to measure those two sweet spots, which 
he calls vibration sweet spots. Sure enough, he found that there are 
quite close together, less than the width of a baseball in fact. But 
Cross also found something else. There's yet another sweet spot which 
is known as the center of percussion which is a fancy technical word 
meaning that if you hit the bat at the center of percussion, the handle 
will just rotate in your hands nicely and smoothly. So now we have 
three sweet spots, all within the diameter of one baseball. That results 
in the fact that there's a narrow zone and all baseball players, even 
if they're not very good, know that there's a zone on the bat, if 
you hit the ball that it feels really comfortable. You're almost unaware 
of the fact that you've hit the ball, because it feels so smooth. 
Eureka. Call it the Australian zone theory of baseball bats. It's 
as easy as the seventh inning stretch, right? I have no trouble hitting 
a baseball. I find hitting a golf ball much harder. Of course, Cross 
admits, he wasn't exactly standing at the business end of a Randy 
Johnson fast ball when he conducted his experiments. It was all done 
in the laboratory and what I did was to string up the baseball bat 
so it wasn't even moving and throw a ball at it or I strung up the 
ball from the ceiling and then swung the bat at it. But you don't 
have to swing at 90 miles an hour and have a ball at 90 miles an hour 
try to understand what's happening. The physics is the same whether 
or not it's traveling fast or slow. Fast or slow may be no matter 
for Cross' experiments, but it does make a difference for a slugger. 
Remember, even the best hitters fail seven out of every 10 times at 
bat. Paul Doherty is senior staff scientist at the Exploratorium Museum 
in San Francisco and one of the creators of the science of baseball 
exhibit there. He says that even if the sweet spot turns out to be 
a sweet zone, hitting the baseball is no can of corn. When you're 
trying to hit the ball, it's coming at you at 90 miles an hour and 
it's spinning in different ways so it's curving or sliding or maybe 
even a slower but awful knuckle ball and you're trying to hit it within 
the sweet zone of the bat, which might be just an inch or more along 
the bat and then you want to hit it top to bottom. You don't want 
to hit a grounder. You don't want to hit a pop fly, so you have to 
hit it within a fraction of an inch top to bottom. And you have to 
do all this in times to which are to within a hundredths of a second. 
That's extraordinarily difficult. Remember that the next time you 
hear the historic home run calling. For the world, this is Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>