<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981005.2000.0371 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the world. I'm Tony Kahn. Going even further than independent 
counsel Kenneth Starr, the chief Republican investigator for the House 
Judiciary Committee, today laid out 15 offenses that could be grounds 
for impeaching President Clinton. Starr had reported to the House 
that Mr. Clinton may have committed 11 impeachable offenses. Later, 
the Democrat's counsel responded by saying that Starr's case does 
not become any stronger by simply subdividing and renaming some of 
the charges he made. The Judiciary Committee is deciding whether to 
open a formal impeachment inquiry. While Congress continues to delve 
into the Monica matter, important international business goes untended 
to the dismay of veteran Congress watchers. The world's Jeb Sharp 
has been speaking with some of them and she has this report. Wisconsin 
Democrat David Obey put it this way on the House floor. At the moment 
that our nation is transfixed on the most pornographic document ever 
produced by government, he said, global challenges face us everywhere. 
Obey then cited the world economic crisis, chaos in Russia, instability 
in North Korea, nuclear proliferation in south Asia, the fragile peace 
process in the middle east and the consequences of global warming. 
Because of the spreading international economic crisis, financial 
experts are perhaps the most frustrated observers of the current Washington 
scene. Well, I think it's pretty clear that nothing is going on there. 
David Weese is chief economist at Standard & Poor's DRI. We haven't 
any of the international funding bills, the UN, the IMF stuff still 
totally tied up. Whenever you have a split Congress, inaction tends 
to be the rule of the day. And I think the Lewinsky scandal has tied 
it up even more than usual. Neither the administration nor Congress 
is concentrating on getting stuff done that needs to get done. Especially 
President Clinton's request that Congress appropriate $18 billion 
for the International Monetary Fund. But Democratic Senator Byron 
Dorgan of North Dakota points out the Republican-led House opposed 
IMF funding long before the Monica Lewinsky scandal. This Congress 
said that the president far earlier, they said we don't want to provide 
$18 billion to the IMF. I think that is a big mistake that they are 
making, but those lines were drawn long before the significance of 
this crisis became apparent. Echoing Senator Dorgan's comments is 
Bruce Genilson, a political scientist who directs the Washington Center 
of the University of the California at Davis. In some ways, the Lewinsky 
issue, you know, almost is a kind of convenient rationale for them 
to use on top of what are more fundamental problems, which is frankly 
an unwillingness to sufficiently recognize the way that international 
institutions and involvements affect the daily lives of Americans. 
Whether Congress' inaction on international affairs is due to impeachment 
distractions or its long-standing antipathy toward President Clinton's 
overseas agenda, the bottom line is the same, foreign policy inertia 
on Capitol Hill. Still, according to Edmund Beard at the University 
of Massachusetts in Boston, Congress' obstructionism hasn't stopped 
Mr. Clinton. The rest of the world still treats Bill Clinton as the 
president of the United States and the commander in chief of its military, 
i.e, the undisputed leader of the strongest military and economic 
power in the world. And they're going to respond to Clinton as the 
leader of the country and they're going to assume and expect that 
he is in fact exercising American power and policy and of course since 
they assume and expect that, he will in fact be doing so. Others cite 
the president's trip to China and the air strikes against alleged 
terrorist bases in Afghanistan and Sudan as evidence of his ability 
to conduct U.S. foreign policy. Norman Ornstein of the American Enterprise 
Institute says President Clinton is faring surprising well on the 
international front. Some conventional wisdom suggested that an embattled 
president or a weakened president or a discredited president would 
not be able to do anything in foreign policy. One of the examples 
used was, of course, there'll be nothing done in the middle east. 
That was followed basically the next day by the meeting that the president 
arranged with Prime Minister Netanyahu and Yasser Arafat making clearly 
some progress. They'll meet again. The reality is that if other foreign 
leaders decide that they want to get something done and they need 
a catalyst, the only catalyst that's available is the president of 
the United States. Even at home, the president may be stronger than 
people think. As elections approach, congressional Republicans could 
well feel voter pressure to move forward on IMF funding and other 
foreign policy issues. And Congress is well aware of the power of 
Mr. Clinton's veto pen. Nobody on Capitol Hill seems to want a repeat 
of the 1995 government shut down. Just in the past couple of days, 
Congress has reportedly moved closer to a compromise on that $18 billion 
package for the International Monetary Fund. For the world, I'm Jeb 
Sharp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>