<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981005.2000.3260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The relations among Boznia's Muslims, Serbs and Croats are notoriously 
tense. They exploded in the war from 1992 to '95 and they've improved 
a little since. But the three groups came together musically this 
past weekend in Sarajevo in what the world's Marco Worman describes 
as a kind of Balkan stock. Two bands from Croatia, two from Serbia 
and five from Bosnia converged in Sarejevo's train station to wish 
a happy sixth birthday to independent Radio Zed. Like Max Yazgur's 
farm, the venue for Woodstock, the Sarejevo train station was an unlikely 
spot to hold festivities. Trains have not run from the terminal since 
the Bosnian war and the building is damaged. Maritsa Bender with Radio 
Zed says thousands of music fans showed up anyway. This is the first 
chance they've been able to see these bands from Croatia and from 
Serbia. For the first time in the past six or seven years, these bands 
have been playing together in Slovenia or in Macedonia but this is 
the first time they met up in Bosnia Herzogovena and the very important 
thing is that all these bands are friends amongst them so it's kind 
of good for them, good for us, good for audience; everybody's happy. 
The bands attending the Radio Zed birthday concert this weekend in 
Sarejevo came from a range of national and ethnic backgrounds. Muslim 
Arman Usachlich plays in the Sarejevo band Beastly Stroke. Arman says 
the convergence of so many different Balkan bands may seem odd, given 
Bosnia's difficulty in reconciling its ethnic tensions. It is a strange 
political situation in former Yugoslavia, but we don't have a problem, 
talk with them and to understand each other because I mean, these 
kinds of people, they didn't participate in aggression on Bosnia and 
they, we can say we are the same kind of people. The big stars of 
the two day concert in Sarejevo were rockers, the Idiots. Nenad Marianovich 
performs with. We've been thinking about whether it makes sense to 
be playing music at times of death and violence. But look, there are 
musicians from Serbia sitting at that table there, a Sarejevo band 
at the one next to it. If it were up to us musicians, there would 
never have been a war. There wouldn't be a war. We've got no problems 
among ourselves. Oh, it's very, very, very nice. The Radio Zed concert 
left Alan Yovanovich Serb guitarist with the Croatian band nearly 
speechless. I was here 10 years ago and after 10 years again, and 
it's very, very good feeling for me and I have no words to describe 
it. Goblini, which means goblins is an appropriate name for Yovanovich's 
band. The group's dark driving guitar sound evokes the music of American 
rocker Smashing Pumpkins. But the mood of Goblini was not the mood 
of the Sarejevo train station this weekend, where Serbs, Croats and 
Muslims made music together. For the world, this is Marco Worman. 
As music from the Croatian bond Goblini live in concert in Sarejevo's 
train station this past weekend and it brings this edition of the 
world to a close. In Boston, I'm Tony Kahn. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>