<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981005.2000.2025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia is not pulling its weight on the 16-country international space 
station project. The Russian space agency is supposed to build a module 
that will house the station's crew. But it's failed to meet three 
target dates because of a lack of funds. Today the agency announced 
a way out. It's going to sell its research time on the space station 
to the United States. The deal will give the Russian space agency 
$60 million, which should help it complete the crew compartment. And 
it gives NASA research time that had been reserved for Russian experiments. 
Well, today's announcement points up serious problems obviously with 
Russia's space programs, problems that we hear about in this report 
now from the world's David McGuffin in Moscow. When you mention the 
Russian space program, the first thing that comes to most people's 
minds is the 12-year old Mir space station. With three cosmonauts 
crammed into a series of orbiting modules, seemingly always staying 
just one or two steps ahead of disaster. But Russia is also a key 
partner with NASA, the European Union, Canada and Japan in the new 
$40 billion international space station that is set to replace MIR 
sometime next year. The date is still uncertain because as with Mir, 
Russia's involvement in this project has been frought with difficulties 
caused by severe government funding shortfalls resulting in launch 
delays that have now reached two years and counting. Sergei Korgunof 
is deputy director of the Russian space program. If this situation 
were happening in a normal the whole system would have fallen apart 
a long time ago. A complete collapse of the Russian program hasn't 
happened, at least not yet. While NASA has a budget of $14 billion 
a year, Russia's space program is funded with a mere $450 million 
annually. But even before the economic crisis, the government was 
only paying out a third of that. Since the crisis, it's become worse, 
so bad that last month, the electricity at a key space port inside 
Moscow was cut off because the power bill wasn't paid. Problems like 
this have already caused two delays of the launch date of the key 
Russian built third module. But Deputy Director Korgunof says he remains 
confident the Russian government will come through with funding eventually. 
In the meantime he says, he has faith in his staff's ability to work 
under adverse conditions. We have fanatics working here. People don't 
get their salaries for several months, but they stay on. They are 
that dedicated to the system. There's even a joke. We haven't paid 
them for a year and still they come to work. Maybe we should charge 
them for working. But NASA and the other partners don't see this as 
a joking matter. Sergei Leskoff has been covering the Russian space 
program for the past 12 years for Russia's Izvestia newspaper. He 
says pushing out Russia may actually hurt the space station project. 
At this time, only Russia has the experience of building a modular 
space station. There have been orbital stations before, but no other 
country in the world has the technology we have, no matter how rich 
it is and how many cars it produces. That's why this cooperation with 
Russia is very profitable for America. If the U.S.A. were to work 
on these modules alone, without using this experience and considering 
the fact that everything is more expensive in America than Russia, 
it would raise the cost considerably. Raise it by $2 billion, some 
experts estimate. But the Russians still haven't come up with any 
clear ideas on how they can overcome their funding problems. Despite 
the economic crisis, Russians still seem to favor the government setting 
aside some of its meager funds to stay in the space station project. 
40-year-old Valerie Sergiev is a recently laid off accountant. That's 
our future. It's the only thing we have left to be proud of. The army 
is destroyed, the government steals from the budget. What else is 
there to be proud of? The international space station's partners hope 
that by January 2000 the Soyeuz rocket will be blasting off from Russia's 
cosmodrome in Kazikstan, carrying the space station's first crew. 
But experts say reaching that goal is going to take a lot more than 
just wishful thinking on the part of the Russians. For the world, 
I'm David McGuffin in Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>