<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1800.3174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In music news this week, two American folk music legends have teamed 
up for a national tour to celebrate their careers and promote their 
new albums. Rock star Beck is alive and well and inside your computer, 
and vocalist Celine Dion can be found just about everywhere, on video, 
on CD and on tour. VOA's Katherine Cole has details on those stories 
and more. Are you ready to welcome Celine Dion into your house? She's 
got a new video set for worldwide release on December 1st. The new 
Celine Dion video is called live in Memphis. It was recorded in August 
of 1997 and features songs in both French and English, including a 
version of the Beatles hit Twist and Shout. But wait, Celine fans. 
There is more headed your way. Not only is she headlining a world 
tour, but Celine Dion can also be heard on new CDs from R. Kelly, 
the Bee Gees and Paul Anka as well as the current Back to Titanic 
soundtrack. And yes, there will be a Celine Dion Christmas holiday 
album in stores by November. In stores right now is the new Joanie 
Mitchell CS, Taming the Tiger. Taming the Tiger is the name of Joanie 
Mitchell's first new album in three years and to celebrate the occasion, 
she's heading out on tour with another legendary singer/songwriter, 
a guy named Bob Dylan. This tour starts in the American Midwest in 
Minneapolis, Minnesota on October 23rd and wraps up at New York's 
Madison Square Garden after going up the East coast and into Canada. 
There is soon going to be a new Bob Dylan album in record stores, 
too. This one is a re-mastered version of a legendary 1966 show in 
England. Well, do you remember Beck? It's been awhile since we've 
heard from Beck and his new CD called Mutations isn't due in stores 
till November 3rd, but that doesn't mean you can't take a listen today. 
All you have to do is head to the Beck website at www.beck-web.com. 
That's www.beck-web.com, and then you may want to head back every 
couple of days as 30 second long clips of new Beck songs are posted 
on that site every two days and then they're replaced with bits of 
other songs. And Cheryl Crow has joined forces with Emmy Lou Harris, 
Willie Nelson, Steve Earl and Lucinda Williams to perform at a benefit 
concert for the campaign for a landmine-free world. I'm sure that 
Cheryl will be performing her new hit, My Favorite Mistake, at the 
show here in Washington on the 9th of this month. Money raised at 
the show will provide financial support for rehabilitation and awareness 
campaigns on behalf of the organization worldwide. I'm Katherine Cole. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>