<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1800.2008 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As David Gullest noted, Mr. Clinton did speak with Russian President 
Boris Yeltsin Monday about the situation in Kosovo. Russia is opposed 
to NATO taking military action against the Yugoslav Serbs in defense 
of the province's ethnic Albania population. Mr. Clinton reportedly 
told Mr. Yeltsin, "The Yugoslav response to United Nations resolutions 
demanding a cease fire in Kosovo have been inadequate," and that the 
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan told the Security Council Monday, 
"Fighting has continued, unabated in Kosovo." And he said Serbian 
forces are responsible for most recent atrocities in Kosovo. Yugoslavia's 
Prime Minister Momir Butatovich says his government is taking steps 
to comply with international demands for an end to the violence. He 
told his parliament Monday, half of the Serbian special police units 
fighting in Kosovo have returned to barracks. U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke 
is in Belgrade to stress to the Yugoslav authorities that NATO air 
strikes are inevitable if they do not comply with the UN cease fire 
resolutions. But, as VOA's Ron Pemstein reports from Luxembourg, the 
foreign ministers of the European Union have taken a more hesitant 
stand against Yugoslavia. European Union foreign ministers did not 
agree to impose new sanctions against Yugoslavia. They simply agreed 
to study closing the loopholes on the ones they already have. These 
include broadening the freeze on assets to cover Yugoslav's state 
owned companies, extending the ban on visas to other Serbian officials 
and making sure the flight sanction in the Union countries profit 
sharing by the banned Yugoslav Airlines. The foreign ministers agreed 
to send a team of pathologists led by Finland to Kosovo to investigate 
reports of massacres there. The team will leave when security conditions 
permit. The ministers also appointed the Austrian ambassador to Belgrade 
as the European Union's permanent representative to the Yugoslav government. 
These symbolic measures are in preparation for what is expected to 
be NATO's decision to order air strikes against Yugoslavia unless 
the situation in Kosovo changes. British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook 
says Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic benefits from disagreements 
among allies. When we start to disagree as to what is necessary to 
authorize military force, the only person who is pleased is President 
Milosevic. Of course, a secured Security Council resolution might 
be helpful in clarifying the position and the ultimatum to President 
Milosevic and we are not ruling that out. However, Greek foreign minister, 
Theodore Pangalos, says he objects to NATO using military action in 
Yugoslavia without direct authorization by the United Nations Security 
Council. Ron Pemstein, VOA News, Luxembourg. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>