<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1700.0356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Republican-dominated house judiciary committee is expected to 
vote by Tuesday, perhaps even sooner, to recommend that the full House 
of Representatives authorize a formal impeachment inquiry against 
President Clinton. That would trigger the third impeachment probe 
of a president in U.S. history. Monday, the committee began debating 
whether there is enough evidence to open a formal inquiry and joining 
us now is national affairs correspondent, Jim Malone. Jim, where are 
we at this point? Well, Tom, the debate is continuing. The Democrats 
have presented an alternative for basically a scale back investigation 
with a timeline. Republicans do not like that particular proposal. 
They will offer their proposal shortly once the Democratic alternative 
is dispensed with. The sort of procedure here is a bit open-ended. 
There is going to be a lot more debate this evening, Washington time. 
It is not clear yet whether they will wrap Monday or have to do into 
Tuesday on terms of a final vote on this. But certainly by the end 
of the week it should be up to the full House to decide whether or 
not there is enough evidence to warrant a full impeachment inquiry. 
Jim, what about these additional charges that are brought by Mr. Shippers, 
David Shippers, the republican counsel? Well as I listen to him lay 
out these various charges, which are a little bit different from what 
Kenneth Starr laid out. Basically, it comes back to the fact that 
Mr. Shippers is not only concentrating on the charges of perjury involving 
the president in the Paula Jones lawsuit when he denied his sexual 
relationship with Monica Lewinski. But he has gone into great detail 
trying to show that there was some sort of a White House cover-up 
going on, that there is evidence that there was obstruction of justice. 
That is what he is really focusing on. What is interesting is, he 
seems to have laid aside one of the charges from Mr. Starr concerning 
abuse of power. Mr. Starr alleged that the president abused his power 
by using various forms of White House privileges, executive privilege, 
attorney-client privilege, in an effort to cover this up. It is interesting 
that the Republican now, the man arguing on behalf of the Republicans 
is not buying that argument very much so he is setting that aside. 
There were some expectations the committee hearing would be somewhat 
rancorous. But it appears very organized and very serious and are 
they making more progress, faster progress than we expected? Well, 
that is a good question. I mean I think there have been a few flashes 
of partisanship. What I am getting from having listened to if off 
and on for the past several hours is we are getting into repetitive 
arguments now. Basically the republicans saying, look we have to have 
an open-ended inquiry. We do not know what the evidence is. We have 
to flush it out. Democrats saying look we know what this is about. 
They say it is about lying about sex, let's just get on with this. 
They cite public opinion polls, that people want this thing wrapped 
up. So they are sort of talking at each other right now and again 
it is an opportunity for both parties to lay out the arguments they 
want to make before the American public. Yes. It is a chance for these 
congressmen to get their faces on TV and let their constituents back 
home see them speaking up. Absolutely. That is obviously one advantage 
that-an opportunity they always want to take advantage of. Jim. Chairman 
Hyde, the judiciary committee chairman, was almost out of hand Sunday, 
seemed to dismiss the proposal by former President Gerald Ford that 
President Clinton might just be brought into the well of the House 
of Representatives issued a sharp rebuke, and that would be the end 
of it. Does this give us some inkling of where Chairman Hyde is now 
headed? Well, I think for right now the Republicans do not want to 
do anything that will alter the course they have set out on which 
is the impeachment process and we should remind everyone we are at 
the very beginning of that process. Impeachment is done by the House; 
it basically questions whether or not a president should remain in 
office. It is up to the Senate, at that point, to decide whether or 
not he should be removed and we are a long ways from that. But right 
now, Republicans say let's not talk about censure. Let's follow out 
the constitutional process of the impeachment inquiry. Thank you, 
Jim. VOA's national affairs correspondent, Jim Malone, who joined 
us here in the 
</TEXT>
</DOC>