<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1800.2738 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Hurricane George struck the Florida Keys Island chain recently, 
it wiped out docks, homes and businesses. Amid all the devastation, 
one Florida Keys institution, the Marathon Key Turtle Hospital survived, 
in tact. VOA's Jim Teeple reports that from an unlikely beginning, 
the Marathon Key Turtle Hospital has become a world renowned research 
for the study of sea turtles. A loggerhead turtle about 15 years old 
swims around its tank at the Marathon Key Turtle Hospital. The tank, 
like the turtle, is large. It's part of a former swimming pool at 
the Harbour House Motel in Marathon Key, Florida, a popular resort 
destination for sport fishing in the Florida Keys. Presiding over 
the motel and the turtle hospital is Richie Moretti, a successful 
entrepreneur who traded in his automobile repair business for a new 
vocation, repairing damaged and diseased sea turtles. As he takes 
a visitor through his turtle hospital, Richie Moretti says his most 
recent patient is expected to recover fully. This one gets along real 
well and he's about 15. If you notice, the left front flipper was 
amputated. See the scar? He got tangled up in fishing line and it 
got tangled around that flipper and it just kept getting tighter and 
tighter until the flipper went gangrene. Richie Moretti says, sea 
turtles get into trouble in part because they don't behave the way 
other seafaring creatures do. Usually when you go near an animal in 
the ocean with a boat, it goes away from the boat. Turtles go under 
the boat so we always ask people to stay a long ways from them because 
the scoot and it scares me to death because I'm always out there on 
boats and I'm afraid to go near them. Richie Moretti says the hospital 
can save about 75 percent of the injured turtles it receives. The 
hospital, he says, has been less successful when it comes to treating 
turtles who suffer from fibra papeloma, a virus that has devastated 
sea turtle populations around the world. Dr. Elliott Jacobsen is a 
professor of veterinary medicine at the University of Florida in Gainesville 
and an expert on sea turtles. He says without the turtle hospital 
and Marathon Key, much of the research on fibra papeloma would not 
have been possible. The research that we've been doing on trying to 
determine the cause of fibra papeloma in the green turtle, much of 
that research wouldn't be possible without support and from Richie 
Moretti and his facility. Richie Moretti says he never really gave 
much thought to sea turtles until he moved to Marathon Key and saw 
damaged and diseased sea turtles. He had just bought the Harbour House 
Motel to use as a fishing lodge and had no idea he was getting back 
into the repair business. And it's very similar to what I did. You 
know, when I worked on cars, they'd come in broken. My job was to 
find out what was wrong with them and fix them and get them back out. 
I had to find the best mechanics and the best parts. Well, in fixing 
sea turtles, I have to find the best vets and the best meds and again, 
diagnose what's wrong with them and get them back out on the road 
again. Now, a decade later, Richie Moretti has a partnership with 
the University of Florida and his turtle hospital is equipped with 
state of the art veterinary equipment, much of it modified for work 
on turtles. Richie Moretti says apart from the satisfaction of seeing 
damaged and diseased wild animals return to their habitat healthy, 
the best thing about repairing turtles is that they never complain 
about their hospital bill. Jim Teeple, VOA News, Marathon Key, Florida. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>