<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1700.0584 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In other news at this hour, UN Secretary General Copi Anan has released 
a much awaited report on Kosovo denouncing Yugoslav security forces 
for attacks on ethnic Albanians, many of them civilians. And calling 
for immediate action to prevent a humanitarian disaster. VOA's United 
Nations correspondent, Max Rustin has this story. The thirteen-page 
report submitted by Mr. Anan to the security council reviews the situation 
in Kosovo since Mr. Anan filed his previous report on September 4. 
The new report is expected to be key factor in firming-up international 
support for possible NATO military strikes against Yugoslav's security 
forces. The security council asked Mr. Anan to submit a report on 
Yugoslav compliance with a September 23 resolution demanding an immediate 
end to fighting in Kosovo province where Serb forces had been fighting 
ethnic Albanians. In the report, Mr. Anan says that because there 
is no direct United Nations political presence in Kosovo, he does 
not have the means necessary to provide an independent assessment 
of compliance. But he provides detailed information based on UN sources 
indicating a large degree of noncompliance. He says fighting in Kosovo 
has continued unabated since he last reported on the situation forcing 
close to 300,000 people to flee their homes. He says it is clear beyond 
any reasonable doubt that the majority of killing and destruction 
has been committed by Yugoslav security forces. But he also blames 
ethnic Albanian separatists for some of the violence and says both 
sides must stop fighting if the violence is to end. Mr. Anan says 
a humanitarian disaster is looming for those left homeless as winter 
approaches. He says a fundamental change in the approach taken by 
Yugoslav's Serbian government is needed to prevent such a disaster. 
He says the government must instruct its forces to stop terrorizing 
ethnic Albanians, to respect human rights and create a climate in 
which people can return to their homes. The report does not explicitly 
take a stand on the question of military strikes against Yugoslav 
security forces, but it does appear to afflict Mr. Anan's growing 
frustration and loss of patience with Yugoslav president Slobodan 
Milosevic, who has made frequent pledges to stop the violence in Kosovo. 
In his report, Mr. Anan says military activity in Kosovo seemed to 
wind down in the last days of September. But he says he is still receiving 
information that the government's armed presence remains significant 
and that the operations of its Special Forces continue. Max Rustin, 
VOA News, United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>