<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1700.0804 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Malaysia's ousted deputy Prime Minister, Amar Ebreham in detention 
in facing trial, his wife has taken the mantle of the infant reform 
movement he started. Assize Ishmael says she is worried about the 
conditions under which her husband is being held. But as correspondent 
Gary Thomas reports from Kuala Impor, she believes the reform movement 
will survive the loss of its most influential voice. In an interview 
conducted at her Kuala Impor home, Assize Ishmael said seeing her 
husband Monday for only the third time since his arrest was a shock. 
When he went into detention, I knew he was tired. Because he had been 
giving speeches. But today, he was thinner. You can actually visibly 
see the loss of weight, 18 pounds, in 14 days is rather drastic. Nevertheless, 
Ms. Assize said, his spirits remain high. Amar Ebreham was fired by 
Prime Minister Mahajed Muhammad September 2. He was arrested 18 days 
later and charged with sexual misconduct and corruption with a trial 
now set to begin next month. He has categorically denied the charges 
saying he is accused because he dared to challenge Mr. Martier and 
advocate political reform. Mr. Anwar is also detained under Malaysia's 
Internal Security Act or ISA which allows indefinite detention without 
trial. Ms. Assize, a 46 year-old eye surgeon, has not been allowed 
to visit Mr. Anwar in detention and is has only seen her husband on 
the three occasions he has been brought to foot. She says she has 
only been permitted the briefest of conversations with her husband 
by his police guards. Ms. Assize says Mr. Anwar's case is a test of 
justice in Malaysia and a rallying point for the new reformation movement. 
But this one to me beyond politics is beyond reach because you are 
talking about the system of justice. That is what this is supposed 
to be a test case, Anwar is a test case for our justice system. Erosion 
of the polices, the media, that was what it was . I mean reformation 
of the revolution. Questions have been raised about whether the movement, 
still in its infancy can survive with its lack of organization and 
the loss of its most important voice. Assize says the spark of reform, 
Mr. Anwar is catching on among ordinary people. I think the sparks 
is-glowing now and is spreading. I do not call it a fire because I 
do not want people to say there you are burning in all that-misconstruing. 
But it is this glow that is spreading and that has brought light and 
I feel it, you know. And then over time, it is going to be this big 
light. And as Ms. Assize points out, in her native Malay, the name 
Anwar means light. Gary Thomas, VOA News, Kualalamboor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>