<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1700.2157 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In April, a UN resolution decurbed the global trafficking in small 
arms was widely praised as an important step in combating transnational 
crime. The resolution was supported by the U.S. government, despite 
the objections of the National Rifle Association. The principal advocacy 
group for American gun owners. Americans and guns is the subject of 
today's Dateline. Here is Pamela Taylor. Last month, a follow up meeting 
on controlling small arms was held at the United Nations in New York. 
It was mainly an informational session and would not have made the 
news at all except for the presence of Hollywood actor, Michael Douglas. 
Mr. Douglas, designated a UN messenger of peace, made an impassioned 
speech in which he noted that the unchecked trafficking in small arms 
has fueled violence in Rhuonda, Afghanistan, El Salvador, and the 
Balkans. He also noted that death by small arms continues at an alarming 
rate in the United States. The National Rife Association, the NRA, 
was invited to attend the meeting in its new capacity as an observer 
with NGO status at the United Nations. An NGO or non-governmental 
organization, cannot vote on UN decisions but may lobby member nations 
on issues of concern. NRA spokeswoman, Tanya Metaksa says although 
the association may not be happy about the April UN resolution, it 
supports it. However, we have seen initiatives being promoted by the 
same people who were participating in this conference that would change 
United States laws to conform to other people's ideas of what kind 
of firearms laws would be best for United States citizens. People 
were proposing that certain firearms be banned. People were proposing 
that global registration of all firearms. Tanya Metaksa points to 
government statistics which show that accidental deaths from handguns 
have declined since the Al Capone days of the 1930s. Gun control advocates, 
however, have their own statistics, claiming that nearly 35,000 people 
die every year in handgun violence, whether it be homicide, suicide, 
or accidental mishap. Tanya Metaksa says the NRA prefers educating 
and training gun owners rather than legislating against gun possession 
which she says is a constitutional right of every U.S. citizen. We 
asked Ms. Metaksa why the NRA has taken its lobbying activities from 
the U.S. Congress to the United Nations. We are concerned about the 
ability of a body such as the United Nations telling any nation what 
kind of laws they should have on the private firearms ownership in 
their own country. What we are doing is as a non-governmental organization 
in the United Nations. We are adding our voice to those of others 
who have some problems with these kinds of treaties and trying to 
show other countries that this is an infringement on the sovereignty 
of the United Nations trying to get this kind of a treaty passed. 
That is our primary concern. Our secondary concern is, of course, 
is as an American organization to defend the right of law-abiding 
citizens to own firearms not only for hunting, but for sports shooting 
and for self-defense. A right that has been in our constitution well 
over 200 years and that the American people in large measure support 
overwhelmingly. But Tanya Metaksa's contention that most of the American 
public favor this right to bear arms is undercut by a nationwide survey 
last month which shows widespread support for tougher regulations 
of handguns. The study was conducted by the University of Chicago's 
National Opinion Research Center and the Johns Hopkins University 
Center for gun policy and research. VOA's Michael Leeland has more 
from Chicago. The Second Annual Gun Policy Survey found 68 percent 
of those questioned favor government safety regulations for the design 
of guns to prevent accidental shootings. For example, nearly 90 percent 
would like to see a law requiring handguns to be designed so they 
cannot be fired by children. The majority also favored mandating a 
design that would allow only authorized users to fire a particular 
handgun. The survey's author, Tom Smith, of the University to Chicago's 
National Opinion Research Center says these and other regulations 
were supported by both gun owners and those who do not own a handgun. 
Although gun owners are less supportive of regulations and restrictions 
on guns, in the most for most questioned, majority of gun owners themselves 
support measures to make guns safer, measures to restrict access of 
guns to criminals, measures to take and make it easier for police 
to trace guns. The survey found 24 percent of American households 
have a handgun and about 2/3 of gun carriers say they arm themselves 
for personal protection. Mr. Smith says the survey found support was 
high for nearly all of the proposed gun regulations and restrictions 
included in the study. The only measure that a majority do not support, 
are measures that, in effect, would either ban guns entirely or at 
least restrict them only to law enforcement officials. The study also 
found almost 80 percent of those questioned found the sale of handgun 
ammunition should be subject to the same regulations and background 
checks as the sale of handguns. Roughly 70 percent feel the government 
should do everything it can to keep guns out of criminal's hands. 
Even if it means law-abiding citizens will have a tougher time buying 
a handgun. Mr. Smith says, among parents included in the survey, 90 
percent would not let their child visit a home they knew contained 
a handgun that was not locked away. I think it is simply common sense 
concern on parent's part that guns are dangerous and they know kids 
are both curious and careless and that they want to err on the side 
of prudence and prefer that their children not be around guns. The 
study was funded by the Chicago-based Joyce Foundation which says 
the survey illustrates a large gap between gun laws and protections 
Americans want and the laws actually on the books. The Washington-based 
National Rifle Association which opposes government-imposed gun safety 
measures says the survey's questions were vague and misleading. It 
says the study does not take into consideration the costs of the proposed 
regulations or whether they would be effective. VOA Correspondent, 
Michael Leeland in Chicago. The NRA also says that it is people and 
not inanimate objects like guns which commit crimes, but gun control 
advocates of guns like Robin Perry of Handgun Control Incorporated 
says that is why it is so important to insure that guns do not fall 
into the wrong hands. I think that it is hard for people in other 
countries to understand how easy it is to get a gun in this country. 
We have no licensing for handgun owners. We have no safety training 
for handgun owners. We have no registration of firearms in most states 
in the country. Basically, all you need to do in order to get a gun 
in this country is walk into a gun store, fill out a form, go through 
a background check, and you know, in anywhere from one day to five 
days, you have your gun. And if you choose to buy a gun that is through 
private sale, in most states, there is actually no background check 
required and there is no record of that transfer. The NRA has just 
got UN observer status and I understand they have been lobbying the 
United Nations and various other organizations for that. What do you 
think, you know, is their objective behind this? Do you think it is 
an international one or do you think it is just to try and defend 
what they might suppose are U.S. interests? I do not know exactly 
what their motivation is, however, I do think it is very threatening 
and very frightening that they have gone international with their 
efforts. I think what they are seeing is that the UN and international 
bodies are recognizing gun trafficking as an international issue. 
They know that if it is easy to get guns in the United States, that 
means that, you know, criminals from other countries can go to the 
United States and buy guns and take them back to their countries and 
sell them there. I think that the NRA is lobbying the UN to prevent 
any kind of pressure from being put on the U.S. to act on tightening 
up these laws. Robin Perry of the Washington-based lobby group, Handgun 
Control Incorporated. She was speaking with Dateline intern, Mark 
Pertinence. That is for this edition of Dateline, I am Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>