<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1800.2342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
China has signed another human rights agreement at the United Nations, 
although its parliament has not ratified one signed a year ago. This 
one is called "The Covenant on Civil and Political Rights." VOA's 
Max Ruston reports, even as the Chinese were signing up for the future, 
they were also denying they had done anything wrong in the past. After 
signing the covenant, Chinese Ambassador to the United Nations, Chen 
Wa Sun made it clear that China believes its human rights policies 
are justified. In keeping with his government's policy of viewing 
rights in broader terms than many other nations, Mr. Chen said, "China 
has basically solved the problem of feeding and clothing its 1.2 billion 
population. This," he said, "has promoted the realization of their 
economic, social and cultural rights." He said, "China also protects 
civil and political rights and is gradually strengthening its legal 
system to defend them." Ever since 1978, Chinese legislature has promulgated 
over 300 laws and the law related decisions. Thus, a relatively completed 
legal system for the protection of human rights has taken shape. All 
the tremendous progress China made so far has laid a solid foundation 
for China to sign or accede to more international human rights instruments. 
Mr. Chen also promised to engage in an international dialogue on human 
rights but he said China is opposed to confrontation over the issue, 
an apparent reference to efforts by the United States and some other 
countries to use trade and public pressure as a means for encouraging 
change in China. The covenant prohibits torture, cruel or degrading 
punishment and arbitrary deprivation of life. It requires that anyone 
arrested be informed of the reasons for their arrest and brought promptly 
before a judge. One hundred forty states have ratified or acceded 
to the covenant. Mr. Chen did not give any indication when China might 
ratify it. UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, welcomed 
the signing and urged China to abide by the terms of the covenant 
even before ratification. New York based Human Rights Watch says China 
is now in violation of almost every article of the covenant and says 
it hopes China now plans to change its human rights practices. The 
signing ceremony comes amid reports that political dissident Chin 
Yung Min was detained this week by police in the central Chinese city 
of Wu Hun as he tried to register a civic group that would monitor 
China's human rights conditions. Max Ruston, VOA News, United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>