<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1700.3178 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A best-selling reference book changes with the times. Another unfinished 
novel by Ernest Hemmingway will be published and a Washington Post 
film critic leads a double life as an author. VOA's Nancy Beardsley 
has Book Briefs. There is a new version of the New York Public Library 
Desk Reference which has become a popular guide to everything from 
literature and geography to versed aide and party etiquette. The first 
desk reference was published in 1989 by Stone Sound Press and became 
an instant best seller. This is the third edition and Stone Sound 
President, Paul Fargis says it suggests just how much the United States 
has changed over the last decade. Not only how we have changed but 
from the people who wrote into us about what they wanted. We could 
see a frequency in those needs. Text for example. People wanted to 
know everything from basic supplies to an immunization chart. They 
wanted to know rules for that etiquette. They want web addresses which 
were not in the last book. Low fat, for example, in the last ten years 
has taken on a huge appeal and we added many, many low fat ingredient 
substitutes. Basic reading lists and scientific terms are all included 
now in the book and in every update for those that we could find. 
The 1,000 page reference also includes new graphs, maps and a wealth 
of so-called infobits which Paul Fargis describes as little-known 
facts or curiosities to pass along to your friends. For example, the 
speaker of the house in Great Britain is not allowed to speak. Or 
Charles Lindbergh was not the first person to fly the Atlantic. There 
were 65 people who did it in a blimp and two who did it in a biplane. 
He was the first to do it alone. I was interested to find out that 
in Israel, postage stamps are couture. In Polynesia, people greet 
one another by rubbing their noses. And New Zealand is the only country 
in the world that has every kind of climate. But here in this country 
when we greet somebody we try to look them directly into the eyes, 
but when they do it in China, they purposely lower their eyes and 
look down as a sign of deference and respect. In deciding what to 
include in the desk reference, editors rely heavily on suggestions 
from the New York Public Library and other public libraries around 
the United States. While the Internet now offers information on virtually 
every subject imaginable, Paul Fargis says it is faster to look it 
up in the desk reference. And although it is a huge book, it is still 
portable. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>