<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1700.2698 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you have ever had a migraine headache, you know the definition 
of the word, pain. There is an effort underway to improve understanding 
and treatment of that often debilitating condition Brian Sislack reports. 
Migraines are common. In North America, the most studied area for 
this condition, 20 percent of women and 9 percent of men get them. 
The numbers are probably similar in most parts of the world. The migraine 
starts in and around the eye or temple and spreads outward to encompass 
one or both sides of the head. It usually involves nausea and vomiting. 
In a minority of cases, one side of the body can become semi paralyzed. 
People can have several migraines in a week. They can last for hours, 
sometimes days. And despite the pain, people often do not get the 
attention and treatment they require. Migraines and other headaches 
are amazingly under diagnosed and under treated and yet they are amongst 
the most common complaints of the human being. Keith Campbell of the 
Mayo Clinic in Rochester Minnesota chaired a conference on migraine 
this past weekend here in Washington. It was jointly sponsored by 
the American Association for the Study of Headache and the International 
Headache Society. The goal of the meeting says Dr. Campbell was to 
get patients and physicians to face the reality of migraines. They 
have been laboring under the misconception that they are psychological 
disorders and therefore, people have been unwilling to go and consult 
their physicians because they feel that they will be told that its 
all in their head. And there is also the myth that doctors cannot 
do anything about headaches. And that, says Dr. Campbell is simply 
not true. Migraines run in families. Eighty-five percent of those 
who have them can name a family member similarly afflicted. A serious, 
but rare form called hemiplegic migraine has actually been traced 
to a region on chromosome 19. Researchers are looking for the gene. 
For those who are susceptible, migraines can be triggered by bright 
lights, loud noises, strong smells and certain foods like fermented 
cheeses and yogurt and stress. Migraines occur when blood vessels 
in the brain constrict and then widen, activating nearby pain receptors. 
Abnormally low levels of the brain chemical Seratonin are believed 
to trigger the cycle. Some of the newer treatments like Sumatriptan 
can block the migraine cycle by enhancing seratonin's activity. More 
traditional treatments like urgotamine and caffeine prevent blood 
vessels from dilating and causing pain. And sometimes, the best treatment 
is the simplest. In fact, many people who recognize that it is going 
to take a couple of pain relieving tablets, be it aspirin or Tylenol 
and a cup of coffee to get the caffeine will solve a mild migraine. 
But the severe migraines require further action. Urgotamine and cortical 
steroids can sometimes prevent attacks. And heart drugs like beta-blockers 
and calcium channel blockers can often reduce their frequency and 
severity. Many patients are looking to alternative treatments with 
varying degrees of effectiveness. Ohio University's Kenneth Hollroid 
has investigated some of these. Acupuncture is a case where there 
is some suggestive evidence that it may be of moderate benefit for 
some people with migraines. Another promising alternative is biofeedback. 
Especially when combined with relaxation training. By focusing on 
keeping their hands warm, patients can reduce blood flow in the head 
and thus control pain. Dr. Hollroid says alternative treatments to 
avoid include homeopathy, chiropractic manipulation, and most herbal 
remedies. He says evidence for their effectiveness is lacking and 
as for the future. I would like to see us do a better job of getting 
the scientific information where we can integrate drug and non-drug 
methods. For example, like biofeedback and medications to prevent 
migraines. And in the process, make people knowledgeable enough to 
get control over their headaches and conquer the pain. I am Brian 
Sislack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>