<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1800.2516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Secretary of State Madeline Albright is enroute to the Middle East 
and a new effort to restart the Israeli/Palestinian peace talks. VOA's 
Al Pessin reports from Jerusalem, despite some cautious optimism, 
it is far from a done deal. Secretary Albright was last here 13 months 
ago. At that time, she spoke of a very serious crisis of confidence. 
She called for a time out on actions by both Israel and the Palestinian 
authority that the other side saw as particularly objectionable. That 
mainly referred to Israeli settlement construction. The Secretary 
also claimed what she called a small success in getting the two sides 
to agree to a new series of meetings. But in the months that followed, 
the Secretary's time out idea was not implemented and the talks she 
arranged did not produce any significant results. The crisis of confidence 
only got worse and her own summary of the situation, more than a year 
ago, is still true today. I think that it is quite evident that the 
crisis of confidence here is very severe and that it requires a great 
deal of work to try to rebuild the trust and get the peace process 
back on track. Ms. Albright's second visit is part of a new effort 
the Clinton Administration has pursued in recent weeks to do exactly 
that. The senior U.S. Middle East mediator, Dennis Ross, was here 
early last month. Then Secretary Albright met with Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netenyahu and the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, in New 
York and then President Clinton hosted them at the White House. That 
meeting produced an agreement to hold an extended Israeli/Palestinian 
summit with U.S. mediation in Washington next week. Secretary Albright's 
visit is to make the final preparations for that summit, which President 
Clinton hopes will result in the long delayed next step in the peace 
process, further Israeli West Bank withdrawals in exchange for tougher 
Palestinian action to fight terrorism. But agreement is by no means 
assured. The two sides remain at odds over many issues, including 
most importantly, exactly what security steps the Palestinian authority 
will take and how the effort will be judged as Israel decides whether 
to actually make newly promised withdrawals. There are also disagreements 
about seemingly more minor issues such as the Gaza airport and Palestinian 
safe passage between the West Bank and Gaza. But any of those issues 
could block an agreement. And now there is a new issue -- the question 
of whether the interim peace period will end as scheduled in May or 
whether it will be extended. No one believes Israel and the Palestinians 
can conclude yet another agreement by the deadline as required and 
Mr. Arafat has threatened to declare statehood in May if there is 
no agreement, a move Israel says would spark a new crisis. At the 
same time, both Mr. Arafat and Mr. Netenyahu are facing conflicting 
domestic political pressures which they must balance in deciding what 
kind of deals to make. Just before she left the region last year, 
Secretary Albright issued a challenge to Mr. Arafat and Mr. Netenyahu. 
We are at a point that hard decisions have to be made by the leaders. 
I will come back here whenever the leaders have made hard decisions, 
but I am not going to come back here to tread water. Now that Secretary 
Albright is coming back, both Israeli and Palestinian officials admit, 
expectations are high, but each side also expresses doubt about whether 
the other side is really ready to make those hard decisions. Al Pessin, 
VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>