<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1700.1344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
VOA travel reporter Ted Lanfare recently visited Graceland, the home 
of legendary entertainer, Elvis Presley. In Memphis, Tennessee. Yes. 
You are absolutely right. And he brought back a big gold medal. It 
is a souvenir of Elvis' concert on August 16, 1997. You do not mean 
1997. Oh, yes, I do. Elvis died more than 20 year ago. Yes, 1997, 
last year. Let's let Ted explain while he gives us a little tour. 
People have never seen Graceland sometimes have an image of what it 
must look like. Southern mansion with big white columns like Terra 
in the Gone with the Wind movie. And inside surely it's flashy and 
gaudy like one of Elvis' Las Vegas shows, perhaps bright velvet pictures 
all around, neon piano, maybe. But Graceland is not like that. It 
is a large house, but not gigantic. When Elvis bought Graceland in 
1957, it was out in the country and the highway leading to rural Mississippi 
where Elvis was born. By then, he was a star, working on his second 
movie, called Loving You. He already had armloads of gold records. 
Now at Graceland, there are a few things mostly at the gift shop that 
are a little gaudy. You can buy lamps with wiggling hips or a plastic 
copy of Elvis' first drivers' license. The house itself does have 
three big TVs and huge stereo unit that Elvis used to love to listen 
to. Mirrored table, a little museum with some of Elvis' sequined suits 
and platinum records, but nothing outrageous. Todd Morgan works at 
Graceland. He says the house is a byproduct of the times just as Elvis 
himself was when he enraged parents and sent young women into swoons 
with his sultry voice and swiveling hips. I guess it is hard for kids 
to understand sometimes today when they see an Ed Sullivan show clip 
and see Elvis shaking his shoulders. They probably cannot understand 
why people were upset by that. People look at pictures and footage 
of Elvis in rhinestones and bell bottoms and high collars and mutt 
chop sideburns and people either forget or they are not old enough 
to remember that that was the style. Elvis was in fashion for his 
time. Graceland is time warp. Visitors seem to love every centimeter 
of Graceland, not because it is a palace, but just because Elvis lived 
there. VISITOR1: He is the king. VISITOR2 He will always be the king 
no matter what. VISITOR3: Touched the gate and everything. That just 
turns me on just to do that. Imagine he would still be as good-looking 
as he always was. Just older. There is not much at Graceland about 
Elvis' final days in 1977 when his weight ballooned and he died of 
an overdose of prescription pills. But there is that gold medal that 
commemorates the Elvis concert of August 16, 1997. You see, on that 
date last year, Elvis' band and backup singers appeared live on stage. 
Elvis was there, too, on giant video screens, singing his many hits. 
For the 25 anniversary of Elvis' death in 2002, says Todd Morgan, 
Elvis will be back on tour using that kind of mix of reality and virtual 
reality. A couple of songs into it everybody forgot he wasn't there 
because he talks to the audience, he jokes, he tells stories, he sings, 
he dances, he flies across the stage. So when Elvis' guitar player 
is live on stage, jamming and Elvis on films, you know, yelling encouragement 
at him or whatever or playing air guitar along with him, there is 
Elvis and then on live screen next to him the guy he is talking to 
and jamming with. Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Wayne 
Newton. No. We are here to entertain you and to make you happy. So 
just enjoy yourself and leave the driving to us. Treat me like a foooooool. 
At Graceland, you can tour Elvis' two jet airplanes, see his pink 
Cadillac, and watch old family films of Elvis, his wife, Priscilla, 
and his parents. That is at Graceland, on Elvis Presley Boulevard, 
a busy place in Memphis, Tennessee. I am Ted Lanfare. Thank you. Thank 
you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>