<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1800.1364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1927, American Charles Lindbergh made history when he flew nonstop 
from New York to Paris. The worldwide frenzy that surrounded the flight 
made the young aviator famous. But in later years, he was criticized 
as an isolationist who wanted to keep the United States from entering 
the second World War. A. Scott Berg, a national book award winner, 
has just completed "Lindbergh, A Detailed Biography." In the first 
of a two part discussion, the author speaks with VOA's Dan Noble. 
Mr. Berg, why did you decide to do a biography of Charles Lindbergh? 
Well, there are several books about Charles Lindbergh, but nonetheless, 
it occurred to me about ten years ago that Charles Lindbergh has remained 
the great untold story of the 20th century, I thought. I say the greatest 
because he was the great hero of the century. He became a great victim 
when his baby was kidnapped and killed. And of course, he became something 
of a villain in the late '30s or early '40s in his stance against 
entering World War II. I say untold story because until now, despite 
all the books that have been written, nobody has ever had complete 
access to the Lindbergh papers and so, therefore, the story has really 
remained untold. Well, how did you go about getting access to the 
papers? I wrote cold, actually, to Charles Lindbergh's widow, to Anne 
Morrow Lindbergh, the beloved and eminent writer herself, and after 
about ten months, I heard that she wanted to meet me. We met and she 
gave me the permission to proceed with the book. In one part of the 
book you mention somebody who had a conversation with Charles Lindbergh 
and the person says that he was a difficult man to converse with because 
he does not understand the light approach to anything. Charles Lindbergh 
took things seriously. And the truth of the matter is, he did that 
as early as childhood when he was the product of mismatched parents. 
But everything he ever did had purpose to it, whether it was planning 
a trip to Paris or whether it was developing an artificial heart or 
whether it was opposing American entry into World War II and he would 
come up with what he wanted to do. He would forge a plan. He's make 
a checklist and then he'd follow through. And of course, you point 
out in your book something interesting, that there was really no precedent. 
This was the first time that he was turned -- that there was media 
figure. Well that's true, and a lot of this had to do with the new 
technology. Radio had really come into its own. It was the first time 
sound was being used in motion pictures. In fact, the first documentary 
footage, the first newsreel footage taken with sound, was of Lindbergh's 
plane taking off from Roosevelt Field in Long Island. The other thing 
I think that contributed to this great super stardom is the fact that 
Lindbergh was so impossibly handsome. He was 25 years old. He was 
the quintessential all-American boy. He was made for the media and 
the media was made for him. Yes, despite his being so handsome, he 
was not very comfortable with women. Not at all. He was extremely 
shy. This was a boy who was raised in almost isolation, grew up in 
a small town on the other side of the river from the town, never had 
any friends, and indeed, had not gone out on a single date until after 
his flight to Paris and after he had met Anne Morrow who was the ambassador 
to Mexico's second daughter. And they met shortly after Lindbergh's 
famous flight to Paris as he had flown down to Mexico. And they met. 
They fell in love. He had three or four dates with her and he proposed 
marriage. As a husband, he was very supportive of her writing efforts. 
He taught her how to fly planes and she became a proficient pilot 
in her own right. But yet, their relationship, you point out, was 
a rather complex one. It was extremely complex. It began as a storybook 
marriage, I think, a real storybook romance, almost like out of a 
fairy tale. But it was fraught with ironies, I think, and the greatest 
irony is that this great independent figure, Charles Lindbergh, even 
though he wanted to be married, he wanted his wife, in many ways, 
to be as independent as he was. And so, it really was he who urged 
her to become a writer. And indeed, she became one of the most important 
feminist voices, I think, in this century. But how ironic that it 
took the husband to pull that out of her. But part of that was selfish 
in a way. It was so that he would have the license, in essence, to 
sort of park her somewhere and then go off on his travels. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Berg. We've been speaking with A. Scott Berg, author 
of "Lindbergh." I'm Dan Noble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>