<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981005.1800.0356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
History is being made on Capital Hill today for only the third time 
since the nation's founding members of a congressional committee are 
debating possible impeachment proceedings against the president of 
the United States and VOA National Correspondent Jim Malone is here 
to fill us in on what's happening so far. Jim, of course, the Judiciary 
Committee is debating how to proceed in an impeachment inquiry on 
President Clinton. How long has this proceeding been going on today? 
Well it started at in the morning, Washington time. They had a lunch 
break, but they've been going for several hours right now and at the 
moment, perhaps in the background, you can hear that they're actually 
voting for the second time today. A little while ago they rejected 
a Democratic alternative which would have called for a very limited 
impeachment inquiry with a strict time limit. That was defeated along 
party lines, 21 to 16, Republicans voting no, Democrats yes. What 
we're voting on right now is a second Democratic alternative which 
also appears to be going down, again, along party lines. So we're 
moving toward what we expect to be a Republican resolution which would 
be a fairly open ended impeachment inquiry with no time limits and 
no limits on scope in terms of what they could discuss. And you know, 
just about every time I've tuned into the proceedings today, someone 
is referring to the Watergate scandal, nearly 25 years ago, which 
of course led to Richard Nixon's resignation. Is the memory of Watergate 
helping or hurting President Clinton's chances today? I think it's 
a combination because there are a lot of analogies drawn to Watergate. 
The Republicans would say that it's similar and that there was an 
alleged cover-up under Richard Nixon in Watergate, that there was 
perjury or lying involved and obstruction of justice and those are 
all very serious charges. The Democrats of course say no, Watergate's 
not a good example because this is essentially about the president 
trying to prevent knowledge of an extramarital affair from coming 
out and there may have been lying and so forth but it's not on the 
same level as Watergate, doesn't rise to the level of an impeachable 
offense where it affected the country's stability. So that would be 
their argument on that. Jim, as I understand it, this debate is not 
about whether there will be an impeachment proceeding, but how it 
will take place. That is, what form the inquiry will take. Can you 
explain that to us? Yes. As I've been mentioning, Tony, they have 
tried a Democratic alternative on the kind of inquiry that the Democrats 
wanted so the Democrats really aren't saying there shouldn't be any 
kind of inquiry at all right now. They're saying, if you're going 
to do it, let's limit it to the Starr report, to the allegations concerning 
Monica Lewinsky, and not bring in other things like Whitewater and 
Filegate and Travelgate, things the Republican say, well, we may want 
to explore those as well. The Republican side has been saying basically, 
look, under the Constitution, we have an obligation to explore all 
the facts to go with the investigation, takes us, not to make a prejudgment 
on what's important and what isn't, so that's why we can't have any 
limits on either the time or scope of the investigation. So that's 
the basic argument on either side, and the Republicans are expected 
to prevail. They are the majority in the House and certainly on the 
committee. Will that happen tonight? Or I should say today for the 
benefit of our listeners. Well right now, in fact, as I listen to 
Chairman Hyde, they're discussing some sort of -- oh, they're recessing 
right now. Without a resolution on the issue at this time? I think 
they're taking a brief recess. I'm not sure how long it's going to 
be, so for now, they're taking another break. I think that the plan 
is still perhaps to try to get it done Monday evening, Washington 
time, but it may leak over into Tuesday so it's a little early to 
say right now. And what about all the public opinion polls that we've 
been faced with as long as this scandal has become public? Are the 
politicians paying attention to what the American people want to do 
in this instance? Well the Democrats say they are and they point to 
opinion polls which show that most Americans just want this to go 
away, that they don't think it's an impeachable offense and that they 
basically just want to get on with life as normal. The Republicans 
say, look, you can't really pay attention to public opinion polls. 
This is a solemn duty they have under the Constitution to explore 
whether impeachable offenses have been committed and they're just 
going to have to take their time and go where the process takes them. 
And of course, the Democrats are calling that a fishing expedition 
-- Yes, they are, and they're saying it's political and of course, 
there is a lot of politics involved in this, no question. Well thank 
you so much, Jim, for keeping us up to date on this. The House Judiciary 
Committee continues to debate the opening of an impeachment inquiry 
on President Clinton. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>