<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981008.0516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Southeast Asian trade ministers proposed a set of ``bold new measures'' 
Thursday aimed at restoring economic confidence in the region, saying 
the sharp cuts in trade and investment barriers they approved a day 
earlier were not enough. The measures must still be studied and accepted 
by each government. If approved, they would be announced at a summit 
of leaders from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in December, 
the ministers said. On Wednesday, the ASEAN trade ministers had set 
targets for reducing regional trade and investment barriers to help 
Asia recover from its 15-month-old financial storm. But they decided 
that additional measures were needed because of alarm over a sharp 
drop in foreign investment in the region, an ASEAN official said. 
The ministers realized they needed to respond quickly because of strong 
international competition for investors, he added. Foreign investment 
has fallen by 33.6 percent for the nine ASEAN countries since Asia's 
financial crisis erupted in July 1997, he said. Philippine trade secretary 
Jose Pardo said the ministers hope the new measures can convince investors 
``to return to the ASEAN investment scene as soon as possible.'' He 
said the measures would cover trade, tourism and investment, and could 
include new incentives and a further acceleration of liberalization. 
Asked if they were really bold, Malaysian trade minister Rafidah Aziz 
replied: ``Under normal circumstances not all of us would be moved 
to accept them. In that sense they're certainly bold.'' The trade 
ministers also urged Japan to reform and resuscitate its economy and 
provide leadership for an economic recovery in the region. They asked 
rich countries in North America and Europe to keep their markets open 
to Asian exports. Earlier in the week, ASEAN set a goal of completely 
eliminating tariffs for many products traded in the region by the 
year 2003, instead of the previous goal of only bringing tariffs below 
5 percent by that year. As a result, average tariffs will fall from 
5.37 percent this year to 2.68 percent in 2003, it said. ASEAN also 
agreed to accelerate tariff cuts for some sensitive agricultural products, 
such as rice and sugar, after Indonesia offered to eliminate all tariffs 
on rice by the year 2010 within the region. On Wednesday, the trade 
ministers signed an agreement creating an ASEAN Investment Area that 
would remove barriers to investment from ASEAN countries by the year 
2010 and by 2020 for investment from non-ASEAN nations. Under the 
agreement, businessmen from one ASEAN country will be granted the 
same investment rights as local citizens in other ASEAN countries 
in which they wish to invest. However, the agreement is subject to 
exemptions if a country's constitution limits equal treatment. ASEAN 
groups Brunei, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, 
Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam. ASEAN officials had earlier said 
that foreign investment in the region had dropped by 50 percent from 
the first half of 1997 to the first half of this year, but later revised 
the figure to 33.6 percent after Vietnam submitted new trade figures. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>