<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981008.0264 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The new Gardermoen facility took over as Norway's international airport 
Thursday, after a massive all-night move from Fornebu Airport on the 
outskirts of Oslo. Although the 12.9-billion-kroner (dlrs 1.7 billion) 
airport has been in limited use for three months, the first official 
flight, by the small Color Air cut-price carrier, took off early Thursday 
morning. The opening of Gardermoen, about 50 kilometers (30 miles) 
north of the Norwegian capital, marks the end of an intense, three-decade 
debate over where to build a new international airport for the country. 
Gardermoen has a capacity of 17 million passengers a year, compared 
to the 11 million that had stretched Fornebu to the limit. The new 
airport was the Norway's biggest construction project on land, rivaled 
only by the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer. Some of Norway's 
offshore oil platforms cost more. Norwegians celebrated Gardermoen, 
with its airy terminal and heavy use of wood and natural stone inspired 
by Lillehammer's Olympic venues, with a gala opening ceremony on Wednesday 
evening. In a nationally televised performance, dancers with stylized 
aircraft portrayed man's many attempts to fly. At the ceremony, Norway's 
King Harald said, ``With some of the same team spirit and goodwill 
of Lillehammer, I hope the demanding breaking-in period will be a 
success.'' Early in its first day of operation, most of Gardermoen's 
flights were on schedule. However, there was little traffic. The Braathens 
airline, a key domestic carrier, was grounded by a pilots strike, 
and other airlines reduced traffic by 20 percent during the airport 
startup. There were some headaches. A minor electrical fire stalled 
a new, high speed train at the airport terminal. International travelers 
late Wednesday waited up to an hour in immigration control lines, 
causing tempers to flare. But fears that road traffic would become 
hopelessly snarled were unfounded, with traffic moving smoothly, if 
sometimes slowly, to the airport. Forenbu Airport on the outskirts 
of Oslo closed Wednesday evening, sending off what everyone believed 
would be the airport's last fight at 7:30 p.m. (1730 GMT) Wednesday 
with pomp and ceremony. But in the midst of hectic packing and hundreds 
of trucks moving equipment to the new airport, a small plane buzzed 
the darkened runways three hours after the airport closed. It was 
an ambulance plane, bringing Cato Huseby, 73, to Oslo for treatment. 
Air-traffic controllers, who expected the plane, switched on the runway 
lights one last time, giving Huseby the unexpected honor of being 
the last passenger to land at Fornebu, 59 years after it opened. ``I 
guess it hasn't hit me yet,'' Husby was quoted as telling the Dagbladet 
newspaper as he was being wheeled off the runway on a stretcher. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>