<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981008.1118 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A day after U.S. peacemakers praised ``a new spirit'' in the Middle 
East, Israeli troops shot and killed a Palestinian rioter during clashes 
Thursday in the tensely divided West Bank city of Hebron. Fifteen 
Palestinian stone throwers were injured and a news photographer on 
assignment for a foreign news agency was in serious condition after 
he was shot in the back of the head with a rubber coated bullet. The 
violence, and assurances by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to hardliners 
in his coalition government that he will not buckle under U.S. erfere 
or keep back rioters. Israeli troops fired rubber-coated bullets at 
the crowds and injured Hussam Abu Alan, a photographer on assignment 
for the Agence France Presse. Doctors said Abu Alan, who was also 
shot in the arm, suffered a skull fracture and was in serious condition. 
He was operated on for three and a half hours and doctors said there 
was a slight chance that he could be paralyzed. The army's Hebron 
commander, Col. Yigal Sharon, said in a statement that ``soldiers 
could not identify the injured photographer among the rioters.'' He 
said the army regretted the injury and hoped Abu Alan would recover. 
The Foreign Press Association in Israel filed an angry complaint with 
the government and army over the incident and called for ``a thorough 
investigation and disciplinary action as warranted along with a guarantee 
the army will take steps to ensure there is no indiscriminate shooting 
of journalists in the future.'' A 20-year-old Palestinian rioters 
was fatally struck in the head by a rubber bullet. He was put on life 
support, but was removed several hours later and declared dead. Afterwards, 
dozens of relatives and friends carried his body, wrapped in a white 
sheet and draped with Palestinian flags, to the morgue of nearby Alia 
Hospital. The funeral was to be held Friday. Throughout Hebron, Palestinians 
observed a general strike called by Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's 
Fatah party, to protest Israel's eight-day blockade of the Palestinian 
areas and a curfew placed on the 30,000 Palestinians still living 
under Israeli rule there. Fatah called for further unrest Friday. 
On Wednesday, U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright held three-way 
talks with Netanyahu and Arafat and afterwards praised the two Mideast 
leaders for finding ``a new spirit,'' and said she hoped remaining 
issues could be resolved in the Oct. 15th Washington summit. U.S. 
President Bill Clinton said he would dedicate considerable time to 
the negotiations, raising fears among Israel's far-right politicians 
that Netanyahu would come under intense U.S. pressure to make concessions. 
Right-wing members of Netanyahu's government have threatened to topple 
the premier if he signs a deal to cede more West Bank land to the 
Palestinians. On the table is a U.S. proposal for an Israeli pullback 
from 13 percent of the West Bank, in exchange for a blueprint for 
a Palestinian crackdown on Islamic militants. Israeli Defense Minister 
Yitzhak Mordechai reportedly met with CIA director George Tenet Thursday, 
in the region to help the sides reach a security accord. But the sides 
seemed unable to complete agreements over smaller outstanding issues 
ahead of the Washington talks, meant to tackle only larger disputes. 
Albright's envoy to the region, Dennis Ross, failed to bring negotiators 
to agreement over a host of secondary issues Thursday and Palestinian 
negotiator Saeb Erekat said they would have to wait until next week 
to be resolved. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>