<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981008.0532 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli troops fired rubber bullets at Palestinians during stone-throwing 
clashes Thursday, killing a 20-year-old man and seriously injuring 
a news photographer. The death raised the specter of new violence 
at a time when the United States is trying to conclude an agreement 
between Israel and the Palestinians on a West Bank troop withdrawal. 
Throughout Hebron, Palestinians observed a general strike to protest 
Israel's eight-day blockade of the divided West Bank town and a curfew 
in the downtown area. Schools and shops were closed. Israel lifted 
the blockade on Thursday morning, but the curfew remained in force, 
confining 30,000 Palestinians to their homes. The clashes broke out 
Thursday morning, with dozens of Palestinians throwing stones at Israeli 
soldiers guarding Jewish enclaves in the Israeli-run downtown sector. 
Israeli soldiers fired rubber-coated steel pellets. Initially, two 
Palestinians were hurt. Several Palestinian news photographers and 
cameramen moved closer to film those injured when troops fired more 
rubber bullets. Hussam Abu Alan, a photographer on assignment for 
the Agence France Presse news agency, was struck in the forehead and 
was taken to a nearby hospital. Doctors said Abu Alan suffered a skull 
fracture and was in serious condition. An Israeli army captain, who 
could only be identified by his first name, Simon, told reporters 
that Israeli soldiers do not target journalists. Capt. Simon said 
that he was told by soldiers that Abu Alan was not recognizable as 
a photographer. Abu Alan wore a photographer's vest and had a camera 
slung around his neck when he was hit. In later clashes, a 20-year-old 
Palestinian, Amjad Natche, was struck in the head by a rubber bullet. 
He was put on life support, but was removed several hours later and 
declared dead, said Dr. Jihad Bader of Hebron's Ahli Hospital. Natche 
lived in Jordan and had been in Hebron for several weeks to visit 
relatives. It was not immediately clear whether Natche was throwing 
stones or watching the clashes when he was hit. After he was pronounced 
dead, dozens of relatives and friends carried his body, wrapped in 
a white sheet and draped with Palestinian flags, to the morgue of 
nearby Alia Hospital. The funeral was only to be held once his family 
arrives from Jordan. Thursday's general strike was called by Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat's Fatah movement to protest the closure and curfew 
imposed Sept. 30 when two dozen Israeli soldiers and Palestinian civilians 
were injured by two hand grenades. A Fatah leaflet distributed in 
Hebron this week also urged activists to throw stones at Israeli soldiers 
on Friday. About 450 settlers live in a number of enclaves in downtown 
Hebron, surrounded by about 130,000 Palestinians and protected by 
large numbers of Israeli soldiers and police. Meanwhile, a blanket 
closure of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip remained in force, barring 
more than 2.5 million Palestinians from entering Israel. The closure 
has been in force almost continuously since the beginning of the Jewish 
holiday period on Sept. 20. The closure was imposed after the Islamic 
militant group Hamas threatened to take revenge for the killing of 
two Hamas fugitives by Israeli special forces. Hamas has killed scores 
of Israelis in recent years in suicide bomb attacks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>