<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981008.1150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ethnic Albanian rebels fighting for independence for the Serbian province 
of Kosovo declared a unilateral cease-fire Thursday, putting more 
pressure on Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to end his crackdown. 
Tensions between Milosevic and the United States, which is pressing 
for NATO airstrikes against Serb-led troops, intensified as Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright declared Thursday in Brussels that time 
was running out for the Yugoslav president to comply with U.N. demands. 
A statement distributed by the Kosovo Liberation Army in Kosovo's 
capital Pristina said the rebel command ``has decided to refrain from 
all military activity'' starting Friday. Kosovo is a southern province 
of Serbia, the main republic in Yugoslavia. About 90 percent of Kosovo's 
2 million inhabitants are ethnic Albanians, and most favor independence. 
Although the KLA has been driven from all but a few scattered areas, 
the announcement is politically significant. Milosevic launched his 
crackdown Feb. 28 after attacks by KLA rebels against police and soldiers 
in the majority Albanian province. He has insisted he needs to maintain 
a military and police presence in the area to guard against further 
KLA attacks. In the statement, the KLA said its guerrillas would defend 
themselves if attacked. The rebels demanded international monitoring 
of the cease-fire. Despite international pressure and NATO threats, 
Milosevic has refused to openly declare a cease-fire, even though 
there has been no major fighting in Kosovo during the past week. He 
considers the Kosovo rebels as ``terrorists and bandits,'' and any 
cease-fire on his part would legitimize them as a negotiating partner, 
one of his associates said on condition of anonymity. In Brussels, 
Belgium, U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke briefed Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright and NATO officials on the results of his three rounds of 
talks with Milosevic this week. He was told by Albright to return 
to Belgrade for more talks. Albright said Holbrooke would be delivering 
a message that the time for a diplomatic settlement in Kosovo was 
``all but gone.'' She demanded full compliance with U.N. resolutions 
to end the crackdown and said ``half measures'' would not be enough. 
Before the rebels' cease-fire announcement, reporters heard three 
or four bursts of mortar fire Thursday in the Malisevo area about 
50 kilometers (30 miles) southwest of Pristina. But U.S. officials 
said there has been no significant military activity in Kosovo in 
the past week. Holbrooke was ordered to return amid further signs 
of opposition within NATO to an attack without further diplomatic 
efforts. At the White House Thursday, U.S. President Bill Clinton 
said the United States would vote to authorize military strikes against 
Serbia if Milosevic ``continues to defy the international community.'' 
``In the days ahead my counterparts in Europe will be making similar 
decisions,'' the president said in a ceremony in the Roosevelt Room. 
Russia's foreign minister, Igor Ivanov, met Milosevic Thursday en 
route to a London for a meeting of the major powers most deeply involved 
in the negotiations. Russia strongly opposes using force to resolve 
the crisis, and Ivanov is expected to deliver that message when he 
meets Albright in London. In the Yugoslav capital Belgrade, about 
20 vehicles carrying diplomats and their families from the United 
States, Britain and Australia left Thursday for Budapest, Hungary. 
The diplomats will remain there until it becomes clearer whether NATO 
will strike to force Milosevic to end his crackdown. The United States 
says that Milosevic has not complied with U.N. Security Council demands 
for a cease-fire, the partial withdrawal of his troops, and the return 
of refugees to their villages. Milosevic says he has fulfilled those 
demands and his spokesman Ivica Dacic said Thursday that the threats 
of NATO strikes were a ``rapist act.'' Serbia's ultra-nationalist 
Vice Premier Vojislav Seselj warned ``NATO soldiers may possibly enter 
our country as combatants but they will leave it in coffins.'' Indicating 
possible retaliatory strikes, Seselj warned neighboring countries 
not to ``participate or help the aggressor ... (or) they will also 
be considered our enemy and would have to face the consequences.' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>