<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981008.1130.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In other news, the House of Representatives has started its debate 
on whether to open impeach hearings against President Clinton. There 
is little doubt about the outcome of the vote expected in about an 
hour and a half. Some democrats are expected to join the republican 
majority in authorizing an open ended, unrestricted investigation 
that could go beyond Mr. Clinton's relationship with former White 
House intern Monica Lewinsky. House Judiciary committee chairman Henry 
Hyde opened the debate. I will use all my strength to make sure this 
inquiry does not become a fishing expedition. Rather, I'm determined 
that it will be a fair and expedestrian disshoes search for the truth. 
We have plenty enough to do now, we don't need to search for new material. 
However, I can't say that we will never address other subjects, for 
would it be responsible to do so. I don't know what the future -- 
The partisan nature of today's action concerns one member of the 1974 
Watergate task force. A party line vote on impeachment could do great 
damage to our system of government. We have a strong present system 
of government, a president who can be tough with Congress. If you 
can have a party line vote to throw out the president, that does damage 
to the office of the presidency. Impeachment is designed to protect 
integrity of the office of the presidency. Misuse could damage that 
very purpose. Now the outcome of today's voting is not expected to 
surprise anyone, but even so, there is still room for suspense. Candy 
Crowley has the story. It begins when chairman Henry Hyde lumbers 
to the house floor with a resolution from his Judiciary committee 
-- A motion of inquiry with respect to the allegations regarding the 
president. It's a kind of official permission slip allowing Judiciary 
to investigate the president's activities. It will be debated under 
the rules of the house for an hour. At the end of that period of time, 
the democrats will have an opportunity to offer a motion to recommit. 
Motion to recommit is congressional code for a vote on the democrats' 
alternative. A full and complete inquiry into the allegations provided 
by the independent counsel, but we would restrict the scope of the 
inquiry to those allegations. And they want it wrapped up by the end 
of the year. That will fail. And then, a vote on the republican-backed 
resolution for an open-ended, unrestricted inquiry. That will pass. 
The process features familiar debate and a predictable outcome. The 
suspense is in the foot -- how many democrats will vote for the republican 
resolution. If the vote represents a partisan split, then the November 
elections are likely to be referendum on the president. The unknown 
is on the campaign trail. What is the political price for a yea? For 
a nay? Particularly vulnerable are 20-30 democrats in competitive 
races. Most have one or more of the traits in the political profile 
of James Maloney, a more moderate than not freshman democrat. A tough, 
tough re-election race in a swing district. You've got as many people 
who want you to go one way as the other. So the only real answer to 
that is just do the way you think is the right solution. Candy Crowley, 
CNN, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>