<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981008.1600.0080 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the debate, many republicans raised the argument that the issue 
is illegality, not immorality. The house voted to begin an impeachment 
inquiry of President Clinton. Democrats crossed party lines to approve 
of the vote. Some democrats who voted for the GOP resolution say they 
were merely advocating a full investigation, not the removal of President 
Clinton from office. Meantime, republicans say if the process remains 
fair, time will be the president's best judge. From here on out, it 
will be a bipartisan process. I truly, truly believe that our committee 
will come together and find the facts. 25 years after Watergate, what 
do you hear on the house floor? That what happened to Richard Nixon 
was fair. The facts spoke loudly and he deserved what he got. My hope 
is that 25 years from now that you'll look back and you'll say the 
process was fair, the facts spoke loudly and Bill Clinton deserved 
what he got. I fear really for the country when we start out in this 
endeavor, this very highly charged and partisan manner. We offered 
an alternative that we thought was fair, that would end in a timely 
fashion. We had a meltdown of Asian economies, and we can't spend 
the next two years on sex scandals. We need also to pay attention 
to our economy and the other pressing matters. Finally, to use the 
constitution. During the debate, many republicans raised the argument 
that the issue is illegality, not immorality. Democrats responded 
that there are more important issues facing the country. The global 
economy is crumbling, and we're talking about Monica Lewinsky. Saddam 
Hussein hides weapons, and we're talking about Monica Lewinsky. Genocide 
racks Kosovo, and we're talking about Monica Lewinsky. Children cram 
into packed classrooms, and we're talking about Monica Lewinsky. Families 
can't pay their medical bills, and we're talking about Monica Lewinsky. 
The issue before us when we consider this matter is not Monica Lewinsky. 
The issue is not sex. The issue is not whether the president committed 
adultery or betrayed his wife. The issue is, did the president of 
the United States commit the felony crime of perjury by lying under 
oath in a deposition in a sexual harassment case? The issue is, did 
the president of the United States commit the felony crime of perjury 
by lying under oath to a grand jury? The issue is, did the president 
of the United States commit a felony crime of obstructing justice, 
or the felony crime of witness tampering? So what's next? Already, 
the house Judiciary committee has voted to go beyond the limits of 
independent counsel Ken Starr's report. Public hearings are expected 
to begin shortly after the November elections. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>