<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981008.2130.1495 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It used to be that girls were more like backdrops than co-stars on 
TV shows. Now shows are giving young ladies equal and sometimes more 
air time than their male counterparts. Jill Brooke reports. Meet Robbie 
-- and alex -- and Holmes. Not sherlock -- but, Shirley. You don't 
have to be a detective to see that something is going on. Instead 
of the boys, it's often the girls who are the leads in kids' TV shows. 
What used to happen was girls were totally ignored. You couldn't go 
to a network with a show that featured a girl lead in it 'cause they 
just wouldn't go for it 'cause the whole ideology that only boys could 
sell action toys and the toy companies were tied into children's programming. 
So there's no girl leads. But that all changed when "clarissa explains 
it all" became a hit. I've considered a lot of other careers. Nickelodeon 
had taken the risk of focusing on "clarissa" to help improve young 
girl's self-esteem. Traditionally, people thought that boys were -- 
they came with an innate sense of self that girls didn't necessarily 
come with. What a surprise it was when ratings showed that both boys 
and girls were watching the show and that content, not gender, is 
what lures an audience. And, as always happens in Hollywood, other 
TV programmers wanted to imitate the success of "clarissa." Soon came 
a long line of other female-friendly shows. "The secret world of alex 
Mack," which was originally written as a boy, not a girl. "Sabrina 
the teenage witch." So what's your theory on this case? I'll tell 
you after Curtis Mattingly leaves. "the mystery files of Shelby woo," 
"mystic knights," "the wild thornberrys" and "the journey of Allen 
strange." Well Robbie, she is a very strong, independent girl and, 
you know, would never get beaten down by anybody. I think that's important 
for girls to see. I want to be a knight. And this trend is not only 
in TV. Look at the latest lineup of kids films. Girls are the leads 
in "quest of Camelot" -- "mulan" -- "Madeline" -- and "Harriet the 
spy" -- but with so much attention now given to girls, some are starting 
to wonder, "what about the boys?" Of course, boys are also featured 
in many of these shows. And in "boys meets world," they are the leads. 
This is happening less and less. The potential downside is that boys 
start to feel unimportant, which, you know, historically, could be 
the way that -- that girls were perceived as feeling in the past. 
Too late boys. Looks like I've saved Ron's hide again. After all, 
the purpose of this programming was for equality, not dominance. Jill 
Brooke, "CNN Entertainment News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>