<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981008.0130.0095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some democrats have been placed in a difficult position with the White 
House pushing them to vote along party lines and constituents pulling 
them the other way. John king reports. CNN has learned the president 
is getting an earful from house democratic leaders about a White House 
anti-impeachment strategy they view as selfish. Sources say California 
congressman Vic Fazio was dispatched to the White House to follow 
up on a phone conversation between the president and house democratic 
leader Richard Gephardt. Top democrats want the president to help 
lawmakers in tough races by making a public statement giving them 
political cover to vote "yes" on the republican resolution launching 
an impeachment inquiry. The advice I give the president is between 
us. The first lady heard more complaints at a morning White House 
meeting with freshmen house democrats. Sources tell CNN, she was polite 
but defiant, telling lawmakers they should vote as they see fit, but 
that democrats should rally to defend her husband against what she 
calls a right-wing political vendetta. The fewer democratic votes, 
the easier it is for the White House to cast the inquiry as partisan. 
But what's best for the president isn't necessarily best for democrats 
up for re-election next month. I think that the president has perspective 
on it. And he is trying to make his perspective known. And he is free 
to do that. The president insists he isn't twisting anyone's arm. 
But I think the vote should be a vote of principle. It's up to others 
to decide what happens to me. Yet Mr. Clinton is calling house democrats, 
as are the vice president and first lady. I don't think we're in a 
position to try to dictate or to compel. But sources say the president 
is rattling off favorable poll numbers, making the case it's safe 
to oppose an impeachment inquiry. House democrats aren't the only 
ones getting calls from the president. Sources tell CNN, Mr. Clinton 
is calling friends and associates into the late night hours, sometimes 
to let off a little steam. Mostly, to seek advice on the impeachment 
debate that threatens his presidency. John king, CNN, the White House. 
The debate begins at 11:00 A.M. eastern. Democrats are hoping the 
one-hour time limit on arguments will be extended. Then two votes 
are expected. The first would turn the matter back to committee to 
consider the democratic alternatives. The second would direct full 
impeachment proceedings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>