<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981008.2100.2202 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First lady Hillary Rodham Clinton spent her day in her adopted hometown 
of Little Rock, Arkansas and even though it wasn't on the official 
agenda she was once again defending her husband, the president. The 
very man whose actions have so publicly embarrassed her. Ron blome 
joins us from Little Rock. ron? Linda, there was from the first lady 
to direct mention of today's vote in the house but she was clearly 
on a mission. In fact she just left the hotel behind me from a political 
fundraiser. Her mission though is to shore up support for local candidates, 
to honor some heroes and to remind the Congress that there are other 
issues confronting America. In this Congress, even though they only 
have a few days left, it is not too late for them to do something 
good for the children and people of America. Hillary Clinton taking 
a swipe at Congress for an agenda too short on domestic accomplishments 
and too long on politics. On the day Congress began the impeachment 
inquiry of her husband, she was home in Arkansas to honor civil rights 
heroes who in turn honored her courage with applause and warm embraces. 
Should be proud to have a first lady like her. And here in the president's 
hometown, friends who want it over with quickly. Let's either move 
forward and impeach, or let's shove that aside and get to the business 
of the nation. But it was at a democratic rally where Hillary Clinton, 
the defender, served up her message that America needs to put domestic 
issues ahead of partisanship. We're able to put progress over partisanship, 
we're able to put unity over division, we're able to get about the 
business of continuing to try to lift people up, not tear them down. 
Linda, it's as if the first lady is on a bit of a campaign swing here. 
Her message -- don't give up. Get out the vote, but she was not taking 
any questions from reporters, as the impeachment machinery rolls forward 
in Congress. I want to ask you about something else that is quite 
an issue for both Clintons -- the Paula Jones case. In fact we've 
heard that it's Mrs. Clinton who finally gave the go-ahead to her 
husband's legal team to settle the Paula Jones lawsuit recently. Now, 
of course, we have some very ominous developments. What can you tell 
us about that? Well, the two sides are about $300,000 apart in reaching 
a settlement. The attorneys say talks are still going on but they're 
nowhere close. Today a federal judge in Little Rock order the release, 
the opening of the Paula Jones case file. That's to come Monday, October 
19. On the 20th, they will argue the appeal and also as we reported 
on the "today" show the president's lawyer faxed a letter pretty much 
disavoiding everything he said during the president's deposition saying, 
see, there was no sex. The president's lawyer now distancing himself 
from some of the words he used during that process. All right. We 
will have to see how significant that comes to be. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>