<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981008.2100.2755 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a full house voting to proceed to an impeachment inquiry, political 
fireworks are sure to follow as midterm elections approach. So joining 
us for their thoughts on what this could mean for both parties are 
two leading political strategists. Mark mellman is a pollster who 
currently advises clients such as Dick Gephardt and Senate majority 
leader Tom Daschle. We also have with us rich galen who is currently 
the director of gopac, a republican political action committee. Both 
of them are joining us tonight from Washington. Gentlemen, welcome. 
hi. Mark, I'd like to start with you. You obviously have a number 
of democratic clients and they have to look forward to the midterm 
elections. One of your clients even defected in the vote today, so 
how have you -- are you advising them now. The truth is most democrats 
obviously vote with the majority of the American people and that is 
in favor of an inquiry but in favor of an inquiry that was limited 
in time frame. What the republicans are essentially telling the American 
people is they want to spend the next six months, the next year, the 
next two years in an unending partisan impeachment hearing inquest. 
What most democrats have said is we've got to call a halt to this. 
We ought to investigate but we ought to put a time frame on this and 
not let it go on unendingly. There is some legitimate concern about 
a backlash. There are polls even out today that the people are looking 
at, that show there is some balance for the democrats, and that there 
are some people who think this has gone on too long already. How do 
the republicans play it? I think it has been going on too long and, 
of course, it lies at the feet of the president. First of all, let 
me wish a happy new year to Mark. Mark is one of the smartest people 
in the democratic party, one of the smartest people anywhere but I 
remember not so very long ago Mark was also saying the American people 
didn't want any inquiry and what you had this afternoon was -- was 
a House of Representatives of the 34 -- whatever 344 people, five 
voting not to have a inquiry at all. This cannot be a good day for 
the White House and I think as we move through time in a measured 
way, in a serious way, in a fair way, which the republicans have been, 
you know, the democrats wanted the rodeno rules and when we gave them 
to them, they wanted somebody else's rules. I think as we move on, 
it will become fairly clear that the individual candidates running 
on their individual issues will have a great impact but I think the 
president over the top of everything will have an impact on the environment. 
But -- go ahead, Mark. The compliments go both ways, thanks. Thank 
you. But the republicans today -- the overwhelming -- 100% of the 
republicans voted to sustain a position that only 24% of the American 
people agree with. Only 24% of the American people think we should 
have an inquiry that goes on without a certain close date. It is remarkable 
that you get 100% of republicans in favor of a position that only 
24% of the American people -- But, Mark, you only got five votes for 
the president's position, which was to not have any -- I'm not sure 
the president had a position on this. But that's what he was calling 
for and that's what he was asking for, but he only got five votes 
for that in the entire House of Representatives, and it is clearly 
a disconnect between the polling and what the members are hearing 
in their faxes, E-mails, and those sorts of things, because they're 
responding to that, I think. I think people want to be responsible. 
They don't want to just say there should be no inquiry, no investigation, 
but what the republicans are giving us is an inquiry and an investigation 
with no closing date. Could go on for six months, a year, two years, 
and that's what the American people don't want. The democratic -- 
the democrats -- the only difference really between what the democrats 
were offering today, which every republican opposed and what the republicans 
offered today was that time limit. That's the critical difference. 
OK, gentlemen, Hang on. Let's move on and ask about the elections 
because that's really what we're looking at next and Mark, let me 
start with you. Realistically, spin aside, could the democrats be 
affected in this election? Well, I would say to date there is, despite 
a lot of spin on the other side, there is really no evidence that 
this has negatively affected democrats and indeed when you look at 
the polling as we've done, as others have done, newspapers, more people 
say they're likely to vote against a candidate who supports impeachment 
than in favor of a candidate who supports impeachment. And yet all 
but five members of Congress voted that way. How do you account for 
that? They don't vote for impeachment. They actually voted for an 
inquiry. An inquiry different in terms of scope -- length of time 
and scope, but the bottom line is the American people don't want to 
pursue this impeachment inquiry, and I think the republicans are paying 
a price here. I'm not prepared to say today that there's a massive 
wave against the republicans on this basis. That's clearly not the 
case yet but I think the predicate for that massive wave is there. 
The republicans today voted for a position that is only shared by 
24% of the American public. That puts them at cross currents to where 
throurts of the American people are. He has a point because he's talking 
about the public opinion polls. Are republicans supposed to look at 
something different as they go to the elections? I think the issue 
is going to be who turns out and votes, and Mark is on top of everything 
else is a scholar, so you can parch these things oh so well but I 
think Mark would have to agree that the polling also indicates that 
the voter intensity -- I don't want to get too technical about is, 
but the voter intensity is clearly on the republican side, that I 
think the republican party will probably -- if you could draw a bell 
curve in terms of the highest mean number that both republicans and 
democrats talk about, I would say that -- that most folks would agree 
that the republicans will pick up in the area of 10 to 12 seats in 
the house and three to four seats in the Senate and I think that most 
people would agree that's what's likely to happen. There are some 
people saying they're fed up and basically a plague on both your houses. 
How do democrats play this now in the last weeks left before the election? 
Rich, I love you, but the -- it's -- it's really remarkable that with 
the republican strategy is based on no one showing up to vote. That's 
your goal. That's the goal of the republicans that the lowest possible 
turnout. The strategy is you can't -- you can't energize your base, 
Mark. You have a base that's looking at Bill Clinton and despite the 
fact that he's got one good poll number, and we've talked about this 
100 times, you and I, that the -- the fact is that there's nothing 
that's happened in the last three weeks that would make somebody who 
is otherwise disenchanted or disheartened, a democrat, say, boy, now 
I'm going to go out and vote for my democrat for Congress. There I 
disagree with you. I think a couple of things have happened. First 
of all, we've seen this Congress fail to deal with the important issues 
like reforming H.M.O.'s, like saving social security. They've got 
legislation to do that. They've got a -- they're going to take 90% 
of the surplus that the republicans helped start -- Covered -- Gentlemen 
-- I knew you would stop us. Yeah. Here it is. It could be a snapshot 
of democracy in action with the two of you discussing it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>