<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981008.2100.0134 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We start our coverage on the hill with NBC's Gwen Ifill. On a gloomy 
Washington day, four hours of debate brimming with emotion, frustration, 
and some bitterness. The global economy is crumbling and we're talking 
about Monica Lewinsky. Saddam Hussein hides weapons and we're talking 
about Monica Lewinsky. Genocide racks Kosovo and we're talking about 
Monica Lewinsky. Children cram into packed classrooms and we're talking 
about Monica Lewinsky. If we leave this president alone if he committed 
these crimes, then we have undermined our constitution and we have 
undermined our system of justice. This is serious. We need to investigate 
these allegations. Ending in a wrenching and historic moment It's 
our duty. It's an onerous, miserable, rotten duty but we have to do 
it or we break faith with the people who sent us here. The lopsided 
vote of 278 to 176, all republicans voted for it. Most democrats voted 
against, guaranteed impeachment hearings will begin next month. Even 
the president of the United States has no right to break the law. 
If perjury and obstruction of justice do not undermine the integrity 
of office, what offenses would? In the end, 31 democrats, most of 
them conservatives, who have disagreed with Clinton on other issues 
crossed party lines to vote with the republican majority in favor 
of hearings. His actions were not inappropriate. They were breath 
takingly arrogant in a man already a defendant in a sexual harassment 
suit. Lee Hamilton of Indiana who is retiring and Carolyn McCarthy 
of New York who is running an easy re-election race voted against 
the president today but in last minute appeals, democratic house leaders 
lobbied for loyalty, if not to the president, then to each other. 
We're all profoundly hurt by what the president has done, but this 
investigation must be ended fairly and quickly. The tawdry and trashy 
thousands of pages of hearsay, accusations, gossips and stupid telephone 
chatter does not meet the standard of high crimes and misdemeanors. 
The punishment for lying about an improper sexual relationship should 
fit the crime. Censure or rebuke is the appropriate punishment. Impeachment 
is not. The Judiciary committee hearings could feature testimony from 
Monica Lewinsky and the president. I think we'll see a better chance 
for nonpartisanship to rear its lovely head now that we're -- this 
is behind us. Talks have already begun on the best way for democrats 
now to contain future damage. Part of that strategy is to get the 
White House to admit to some of Kenneth Starr's charges upfront, moving 
what has quickly become a national spectacle to a speedy conclusion. 
Gwen Ifill, NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>