<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981008.2100.0740 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joining us tonight, two powerful attorneys who have been on top of 
this story from the beginning and who have both represented some key 
players. Lanny Davis is former White House counsel to the president. 
And Joe digenova. Welcome. Good evening. Lanny, let me start with 
you. Have you spoken with anyone at the White House yet? I've spoken 
to several people and the overall reaction is the vote today basically 
confirmed a partisan approach but I would speak personally and not 
on behalf of the White House that I think probably Joe will agree 
with this, that now the Congress, the house, and the country can turn 
to the real issue at hand, which is what is or is not an impeachable 
offense. I believe that under the constitution, the judgment will 
be that regardless of how wrongful the president's conduct was, this 
is not an offense by which he ought to be impeached or for which he 
should resign. But I think some could fairly argue there is still 
some mulling over to do about how many of the democrats defected. 
Joe, of course, only one 31 defected. Any surprises for the republicans 
in that? no. Actually the number that most people have been looking 
for was somewhere between 30 and 35. The other numbers that had been 
talked about of democratic defections were sort of the phony expectation 
game being put out by people. This number reflected the number of 
democrats who had problems with the president's conduct in terms of 
their own election races and some with more serious problems, but 
the truth is, actually over 420 members of Congress voted for some 
form of inquiry today. So that is obviously an unpleasant reality 
for the White House. ok. So now the vote is over. We're hearing that 
there are daily conference calls at the White House, that the war 
room is back in action. What do you know about that? Well, I never 
get into my own specific dealings with those kinds of conversations 
but what I know about is that the White House, I believe, and the 
House of Representatives now is committed to a fair process, an expedited 
process. Chairman Hyde committed to that. I personally believe chairman 
Hyde and I think that the American people are overwhelmingly in support 
of that, and I -- and at the end of the day there will be a considered 
judgment about what is or isn't an impeachable offense. I think the 
president should be held accountable. I hope he will respond to questioning 
if invited. I hope that we will have some accountability solution 
here and that we can get back to the nation's business which I think 
everybody wants us to do. Now you've heard Joe digenova. Is the president 
mortally wounded? I don't think Joe would even describe it that way. 
I think the process that has been voted on -- Joe is absolutely right. 
An overwhelming number of democrats and republicans, notwithstanding 
a majority of the American people are saying otherwise, believe there 
should be some process. The difference, I believe, is that the democrats 
reflecting most people wanted to have reasonable time limits and reasonable 
subject area limitations, but now that's behind us. The key issue 
here is what is or isn't an impeachable offense. There's no question 
in my mind that the constitution and the framers never intended this 
kind of conduct, however wrongful, to be impeachment and therefore 
I think at the end of the day we will have some accountable solution 
short of impeachment ok, joe. Now some would argue that the republicans 
have to tread carefully here. Even a poll today that said that a lot 
of Americans do not favor going forward with this. So how do republicans 
play it from here? Well, again, I would -- first of all, we don't 
conduct these things by polls. This is a very significant and important 
constitutional inquiry. Over 420 members of Congress today voted for 
some impeachment inquiry. The democrats wanted a different kind of 
impeachment inquiry that was eventually approved but remember, over 
420 voted for one. The members do have to be careful. They must be 
judicious. They have to move this along as quickly as possible. Chairman 
Hyde of Illinois, the republican chairman, is the best possible person 
to be in charge of this inquiry. He is a man of immense judgment. 
He's retrained. And I think that will be one of the most important 
things of all here, and as long as the White House does not engage 
in attacks on the chairman and the members of the committee and does 
in fact cooperate as the president promised he would today, the process 
will move along swiftly. In in fact the White House attempts to delay 
and becomes a problem, there will be problems for everyone, not just 
the president. I agree with Joe again. The White House is going to 
be cooperative. I think it's in everyone's interest to hold chairman 
Hyde to his word, that this should be expedited and get this behind 
us but let me also remind you, the reason there was a vote today rather 
than a day after the election is not because the house republicans 
want to move on quickly to get into this inquiry. They're going home. 
They're not going to do anything until after the election. The reason 
they chose the vote today is because of politics, because they want 
to get an advantage on election day, and on that I genuinely believe 
they risk a backlash at the polls in November. While we're accustomed 
to losing seats as the incumbent party and the president, remember 
Ronald Reagan lost the United States Senate at the height of his popularity 
in 1986. Today's vote and the timing of the vote was about politics 
and nothing more. ok. Joe, quickly to you, one final question. Let 
me just ask it because this is important. The Paula Jones development. 
How do you view that? I think it's a very serious development for 
the president. His lawyer submitted a letter according to NBC news 
to the judge eight days ago in which he said that the Monica Lewinsky 
affidavit was not true and that when he used it in that proceeding, 
he was not aware that it was not true. For the president, this is 
very serious, because it means that Mr. Bennett could very well end 
up being a witness in the Paula Jones case and that the attorney-client 
privilege for the purposes of the use of that affidavit could be lost 
for President Clinton and that Mr. Bennett might be a witness against 
him in that proceeding and might even be a witness at the impeachment 
proceeding. Mr. Bennett might be disqualified as his firm might be, 
so there's a lot to see what happens in that case. Thank you very 
much. Lanny Davis and Joe digenova with us tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>