<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
EASTERN CONFERENCE ATLANTIC DIVISION DEVILS _ Coach Robbie Ftorek, 
replacing Jacques Lemaire, must inspire a mechanical team that pulled 
its own plug in the playoffs. The Scott Niedermayer contract hassle 
is another penny-wise power play by General Manager Lou Lamoriello. 
He may save money and win, but at what cost? With new rules favoring 
attackers, this veteran defense could seem a step slower. And someone 
must fill Doug Gilmour's center slot. ISLANDERS _ The heavy-handed 
fiasco over the lease at Nassau Coliseum is an embarrassment to the 
league. The reluctance of the new owners to sign Zigmund Palffy shortchanges 
the fans. If the commissioner's office can suspend players for bad 
conduct, why can't it discipline owners like Howard Millstein and 
Steven Gluckstern? RANGERS _ This deeply flawed team needs major rebuilding. 
It should improve, nevertheless, over last season's underachievement. 
John Muckler, a first-rate coach, could get them back in the playoffs 
_ assuming Brian Leetch and Mike Richter rebound. General Manager 
Neil Smith, under pressure in his 10th season, must deal for a center 
or a high-scoring wing. Although everyone admires the gracefully aging 
Wayne Gretzky, it is hard to shape a team around a 20-year veteran, 
even a Great One. PHILADELPHIA FLYERS _ By turning up the heat under 
Eric Lindros this summer, General Manager Bob Clarke deflected attention 
from his failure to solve his goaltending problem. Now that Clarke 
has chosen John Vanbiesbrouck as his goalie, net, he can contemplate 
the hole left on his defense by his perplexing trade of Janne Niinimaa. 
PITTSBURGH PENGUINS _ More than most general managers, Craig Patrick 
thrives under difficult circumstances. But it will be harder than 
ever with two warring co-owners and without Ron Francis. Why not trade 
Petr Nedved, a no-show, for two or three important components? NORTHEAST 
DIVISON BOSTON _ Seasons of great improvement are often followed by 
a plateau or a dip. Watch out, Bruins. It would be nice if Joe Thornton's 
second year is as good as Sergei Samsonov's first. For Ray Bourque, 
it's 20 seasons _ any decade now, he'll slow down. BUFFALO _ Lindy 
Ruff's coaching debut was spectacular, healing bruised egos and leading 
a mediocre cast into the third round of the playoffs. Three consecutive 
Hart and Vezina trophies may be too much to ask from goalie Dominik 
Hasek. Defenseman Aleksei Zhitnik is ripening into a Norris Trophy 
contender, but he is one of four unsigned players. MONTREAL _ Uncertain 
goaltending is just one of the problems. The brewery ownership is 
easing off the money tap. Despite a dynastic history, the Canadiens 
seem settled in the middle of the pack. Aside from Saku Koivu, few 
Canadiens are much fun to watch. OTTAWA _ Last season's improvement 
may be hard to continue. Injuries will delay the debuts of forward 
Daniel Alfredsson and defenseman Janne Laukkanen. Rick Dudley replaces 
Pierre Gautheir as general manager. Now that he is the captain, can 
Aleksei Yashin reach the next level of maturity and stardom? TORONTO 
_ So far, the team president Ken Dryden's best move has been to join 
a division with Canadian neighbors Ottawa and Montreal. He and his 
top aide, Mike Smith, also acquired goalie Curtis Joseph as a free 
agent and hired Pat Quinn as coach. Amid a shrill media and fan environment, 
the Leafs will soon leave their old Garden for a new arena and, maybe, 
a better era. SOUTHEAST DIVISION CAROLINA _ Ron Francis, the free-agent 
center signed from Pittsburgh, might be a good fit behind Keith Primeau. 
With one year until the Raleigh arena is finished, the Hurricanes 
will block out thousands of their 21,000 seats with drapes to make 
the small crowds in Greensboro seem larger. The fans may like the 
improving team they see. FLORIDA _ General Manager Bryan Murray has 
hired brother Terry to coach this free-falling team. A new arena is 
just Phase One of the franchise's overall reconstruction project. 
It is optimistic to think of newly signed goalie Sean Burke as a cornerstone. 
TAMPA BAY _ Most general managers with his track record would be gone 
by now. But Phil Esposito, a survivor, has a new owner to bamboozle. 
A franchise like this could ruin a top prospect like Vincent Lecavalier. 
Coach Jacques Demers, dismissed from New Jersey, is a turnaround specialist 
who gets the last, best effort from veteran discards. Esposito has 
given him many, like Wendel Clark. WASHINGTON _ After losing Stanley 
Cup finals, the Florida Panthers and Philadelphia Flyers regressed. 
It could happen to the Capitals, the surprising finalists last June. 
Dmitri Mironov joins a better-than-average defense. Peter Bondra is 
the best of a so-so offense. Can Goalie Olaf Kolzig equal the best 
season of his career? WESTERN CONFERENCE CENTRAL DIVISION CHICAGO 
_ Dirk Graham, a rookie coach, is not much older than two of his stars: 
Chris Chelios, the venerable defenseman, and Doug Gilmour, the well-traveled 
center who arrives as a free agent. They missed the playoffs for the 
first time in almost three decades, and they might not be back this 
spring. DETROIT _ With two rings in hand, the Wings might be the first 
team since the Islanders to win the Stanley Cup three times in succession. 
If he returns, Coach Scotty Bowman will arrive late, after recovering 
from heart and knee surgery. Brendan Shanahan may no longer be a top-echelon 
power forward. Uwe Krupp, a free agent from Colorado, arrives to bolster 
the defense as Slava Fetisov retires. NASHVILLE _ After serving an 
apprenticeship under the Devils' Martin Brodeur, Mike Dunham gets 
a chance to prove he is a first-string goalie with what could be a 
last-place expansion team. Tom Fitzgerald, a veteran with experience 
in winning programs, is a good choice for captain. With a new arena 
in a new market, hockey could climb the sports charts in the country-music 
capital. ST. LOUIS _ The Blues were fun to watch again and they finished 
with the fourth-best record in the NHL. But they might miss Brett 
Hull and Steve Duchesne. Goalie Grant Fuhr may finally be wearing 
out as Jamie McLennan ripens. On defense, Chris Pronger is reaching 
elite status while Al MacInnis is still there. NORTHWEST DIVISION 
CALGARY _ Since the 1989 Stanley Cup, this has become a low-budget, 
fading franchise. Veteran goalie Ken Wregget, acquired from Pittsburgh, 
might help, but how much and for how long? Despite a youth movement, 
they've added ancient defensemen Steve Smith and Phil Housley. Down 
the trail, the franchise stampede away from Canada could include this 
Alberta team. COLORADO _ Has it been just two years and four months 
since they won the Stanley Cup? Chemistry wasn't right on a talented 
team that declined sharply. Coach Bob Hartley, the rookie replacing 
Marc Crawford, must replace defenseman Uwe Krupp, who signed with 
Detroit, while changing a lot of attitudes. EDMONTON _ Just remaining 
in town is a yearly victory for the ownership-challenged Oilers. The 
loss of goalie Curtis Joseph can't help a mediocre but interesting 
group. This low-scoring, low-budget team must sign or trade Doug Weight, 
a restricted free agent. With a coaching staff of Ron Low and Kevin 
Lowe, a losing streak could unleash a blizzard of headline puns. VANCOUVER 
_ In a coastal city with mountain vistas, the team's leadership could 
get volcanic. Brian Burke, a tough guy fresh from the league office, 
is now the general manager in charge of strong-willed Coach Mike Keenan 
and the assertive captain, Mark Messier. Hear the rumble? Now that 
Pavel Bure has refused to report, Burke could begin rebuilding with 
a major deal. PACIFIC DIVISION ANAHEIM _ Having switched from Ottawa 
to Anaheim, can General Manager Pierre Gauthier rebuild another struggling 
team? Paul Kariya's recovery from his most serious concussion will 
keep everyone's fingers crossed. Beyond Kariya and Teemu Selanne, 
the Ducks still lack depth and defensemen. Any year now, the Disney 
ownership should begin investing good money for more good players. 
DALLAS _ Brett Hull, signed as a free agent, could be the final element 
of a Stanley Cup combination. An exhibition-season suspension shows 
big Derian Hatcher as mean as ever. Much depends on Joe Nieuwendyk's 
comeback from knee surgery and goalie Ed Belfour's steadiness in the 
playoffs. Would a hockey championship make them North America's team? 
LOS ANGELES _ Coach Larry Robinson and General manager Dave Taylor 
are building something nice for next season's new arena. They got 
defenseman Steve Duchesne to help the power play and complement Rob 
Blake, coming off a Norris Trophy season. Like Boston, two steps forward 
might be followed by one step back. But the Kings could be good in 
a year or two. PHOENIX _ A brief holdout by Keith Tkachuk got the 
Coyotes off on the wrong skate. Jyrki Lumme, signed as a free agent 
from Vancouver, makes a good defense better. At 28, center Jeremy 
Roenick may already be past his prime. Same for Rich Tocchet, 34. 
Despite a better-than-average roster, the Coyotes' quirky uniforms 
and mis-shapen arena make this franchise hard to warm up to. SAN JOSE 
_ With the free agent Gary Suter joining Bryan Marchment, the Sharks 
have two of the sport's most villified defensemen. Could it be our 
boys have done something rash? Last spring's rare playoff appearance 
sparked new hope for one of the sport's best-supported and most chronically 
disappointing teams. Mike Vernon steadied the goaltending, and center 
Patrik Marleau could be that rarest of Sharks: a young, home-grown, 
starring forward. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>