<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0469 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Chilean military officer linked to unlawful executions and torture 
during the era of dictator Augusto Pinochet is serving as the chief 
military observer of a United Nations mission on the India-Pakistan 
border, a human rights group says. The group, Human Rights Watch, 
has written to Secretary General Kofi Annan, asking him to remove 
the officer, Brig. Gen. Sergio Espinoza Davies. The U.N. Military 
Observer Group in India and Pakistan is the organization's longest-running 
monitoring operation, put in place in 1949 along the cease-fire line 
in the disputed territory of Kashmir, where since 1989 thousands of 
people have been killed or detained by Indian troops and remain unaccounted 
for. Muslim militants are also accused of abuses against Hindus in 
Kashmir. Espinoza was assigned to the U.N. Department of Peacekeeping 
Operations by the Chilean Defense Ministry, following a common procedure 
through which countries ``lend'' military expertise to the organization. 
The Espinoza case demonstrates one of the pitfalls in this arrangement. 
The peacekeeping department, now under the direction of Under Secretary 
General Bernard Miyet of France, has neither the extra staff nor an 
established process to study thoroughly the backgrounds of officers 
or troops assigned to it. The department, which has relied heavily 
on borrowed help, faces even more cuts in its strength because of 
a general assembly demand that staff members whose salaries are paid 
by governments and not the United Nations be removed from many posts. 
Those cuts would not necessarily reduce the chances of bad appointments, 
however. In the field, peacekeeping operations rely on many officers 
and troops from countries where human rights violations by the military 
and the police are common. Those are often the only countries prepared 
to commit forces to United Nations operations. Chile has been a democracy 
since 1990, but its officer corps has not been purged of members who 
served under Pinochet, who did not retire as army commander until 
March of this year and is now a senator for life. ``Chile is still 
a country in transition to democracy,'' said Jose Miguel Vivanco, 
executive director of the Americas division of Human Rights Watch. 
``It is essential for the civilian government to develop a mechanism 
for screening before international appointments are made.'' In Santiago, 
Chilean officials have stood by Espinoza, saying he is doing a good 
job. United Nations officials said they had asked the Chilean government 
about the complaints but had not received a reply. ``Human Rights 
Watch believes that Brigadier General Espinoza's documented participation 
in the worst human rights abuses in his home country renders him unfit 
to lead a peacekeeping mission that seeks to uphold the international 
human rights principles upon which the United Nations was founded,'' 
the rights organization said in a letter signed by Vivanco and Joanna 
Weschler, its U.N. representative. Espinoza's activities as an army 
captain and member of war crimes tribunals set up in 1973 in the early 
days of Pinochet's rule were documented by the Chilean National Commission 
on Truth and Reconciliation in 1991. In one case cited by Human Rights 
Watch, a panel on which Espinoza sat sentenced six socialist leaders 
to death in the city of Iquique. The crimes against the six, four 
of whom were executed immediately, were not proved, the national commission 
found. The bodies were never recovered. U.N. officials say the matter 
is being investigated. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>