<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The home office may seem like a new idea, but it has existed for at 
least 300 years in the West. In fact, ``From Paris to St. Petersburg: 
Important French and Russian Furniture and Works of Art,'' an exhibition 
that opened this week at the Chinese Porcelain Company, shows three 
``home offices'' from three centuries. The show, which continues through 
Oct. 31 at the gallery at 475 Park Avenue, at 58th Street, in Manhattan, 
includes tall cabinets and secretaries with panels that open to become 
desktops _ perfect for an IBM Thinkpad, printer and phone. You can 
buy a two-piece ensemble, a cabinet and matching table, all rigged 
up and ready to go, for $600,000. For another $160,000, you can get 
an incense burner, known as an athenienne, with gilt bronze satyr 
heads and cloven feet that is far more attractive than a fragrance 
candle. Move over Ikea: here comes Louis XIV. The oldest of the three 
home offices is a monumental ebony cabinet on a stand, made by the 
Manufacture Royale des Meubles de la Couronne, commonly known as the 
Manufacture des Gobelins, in about 1680. This royal workshop in Paris 
made furnishings for royal palaces, employing weavers, painters, bronze 
workers, cabinetmakers and goldsmiths. In the 1660s, Louis XIV's finance 
minister, Colbert, gave the factory new royal patronage to inspire 
the French nobility to take the king's cue. It was part of his campaign 
to stimulate the manufacture of luxury goods in France _ to stop the 
French from buying expensive imports. Obviously inspired by the Italian 
Baroque, the opulent cabinet has an elaborate, carved giltwood stand 
whose legs are in the form of cherubic caryatids, seen from the waist 
up. Each cherub holds a wooden tasseled pillow above his head, on 
which the cabinet top sits. The cherubs are linked by carved garlands. 
The cabinet's intricate marquetry doors depict bouquets of flowers 
in urns, with wild foliage, birds and butterflies in purplewood, walnut, 
holly, satinwood, boxwood, cherry and ivory inlays. The scenes are 
framed by inlaid fillets of pewter. The cabinet's doors open to reveal 
a silk-lined interior with a central shelf and two drawers. The matching 
table, obviously made by the same Gobelins master, is an equally virtuoso 
display of craftsmanship, with identical motifs. Unlike many tables 
with caryatid legs, the cherubs on this table all face front, which 
means the table was meant to be set against a wall, as a desk would 
be. Nowadays, the gallery director, Khalil Rizk, explained, people 
often remove the two back legs and turn them around, so the table 
can be placed in the center of a room. This table, however, retains 
its original form. This is the set that costs $600,000. The second 
cabinet is dated 1755 and is smaller. More important, it is signed 
``RVLC,'' the initials of a famous French ebeniste, Roger van de Cruse, 
popularly known as Lacroix. It is called a secretaire a abbatant, 
a freestanding writing desk that looks like a cupboard, complete with 
drawers and compartments that can be locked. Its fall-front panel 
closes vertically, to conceal books and papers. This ingenious design 
is still being copied today. This secretary is also decorated with 
marquetry, but in a totally different style. Here the scenes are chinoiserie. 
James Cummings, the author of the sumptuous catalog that accompanies 
the show, suggests that they were influenced by the 18th-century French 
painter Antoine Watteau. The top panel depicts a Western woman in 
Chinese costume carrying a parasol. She is watching a group of Chinese 
launderers who are working at large tubs under a tree. The inlay is 
made with minute pieces of satinwood, rosewood and other exotic woods 
stained red, pale green and orange. The facial expressions are charming 
and delicate. The interior is a tour de force. The drawers and the 
interiors of the doors are covered in an elaborate geometric design, 
like wallpaper but worked out in marquetry. Also from this era is 
the incense burner, thought to be made in Paris about 1780 for the 
Russian market. It is made of steel and copper, with gilt bronze decorations, 
including a pine cone top, a sunflower frieze, ram's and satyr heads. 
Such incense burners, Risk said, were meant not only to freshen the 
air but also to banish bad spirits. The superstitious Russians hoped 
the incense would protect them from evil. The third secretary, from 
1810, is more severe, neo-classical in style, with flaming mahogany 
veneers and elaborate gilt bronze mounts that resemble a garland of 
flowers. Its pale pearwood interior boasts not only drawers but also 
a mirrored back. Here, you can do both papers and your makeup, a practical 
home office indeed. Perhaps it was the mirrored interior that attracted 
one former owner, Daisy Fellowes. Ms. Fellowes, granddaughter of the 
sewing machine magnate Isaac Merritt Singer, was an American beauty 
who lived in Paris, after her first husband, the Duc de Brissac, died 
in World War I. She was considered one of the world's best-dressed 
women. When she was the editor of Harper's Bazaar, she bought the 
Tete de Belier, a pink diamond with 17.47 carats that Catherine the 
Great once owned. The diamond inspired the Paris couturier Elsa Schiaparelli 
to create a new color: shocking pink. The first thing visitors to 
the Chinese Porcelain Company see is a window dressed with a set of 
gilded Russian armchairs upholstered in shocking orange. Whether the 
Russians would have used such a color, which seems more in the 1950s 
taste of the late Parisian decorator Henri Samuel, will surely be 
a subject of discussion at a symposium next week sponsored by the 
Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts. The Center 
is sponsoring the conference next Friday and Saturday to present new 
research on upholstery produced between the 17th and 19th centuries. 
The two-day conference will be held at The Abigail Adams Smith Museum's 
auditorium at 417 East 61st Street and costs $175. Information: (212) 
501-3000. The symposium will include talks by various specialists 
flying in from Britain, France, Germany, Austria and Sweden. ``Upholstery 
has been the poor relation in the furniture world,'' one scheduled 
speaker, Frances Collard of the Victoria &AMP; Albert Museum in London, 
said. ``Only recently have people become interested in it.'' Another 
speaker, Elizabeth Lahikainen, a private conservationist in Essex, 
Mass., said: ``Historic upholstery has distinguishing factors: material 
distinctions, fabric styles and upholstery techniques. When you are 
upholstering old pieces, you have to think about the content of the 
original fabric, color and scale.'' Have they done that at the Chinese 
Porcelain Company? What would Ms. Lahikainen think about that shocking 
orange? Go back to your office, but stay tuned. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>