<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are no proven ways to tag or mark gunpowder to make it more 
easily detectable or to deter its use in bombings, a National Research 
Council panel said Thursday. In addition, the state of tagging technology, 
which has not been extensively researched, and the relatively low 
level of threat from illicit explosives using black and smokeless 
powders, do not support suggestions to immediately start marking these 
materials, the panel said. The 14-member committee said current methods 
for detecting gunpowder bombs, including metal detectors and X-ray 
systems that spot devices containing the explosives, and trained dogs, 
were relatively effective. ``In order to guard against future threats, 
however, the committee believes that the government should study more 
complex detection and identification methods so that policymakers 
are better able to react if circumstances arise that warrant a more 
aggressive response,'' it said. The committee called for research 
into promising tagging technology, much of which was being developed 
by small companies, and for the firearms bureau and the FBI to combine 
and expand databases each was maintaining on gunpowders. This could 
be helpful in tracing the origin of explosives used in bombings. The 
Clinton administration, in antiterrorism proposals stemming from the 
Oklahoma City bombing in 1995 and the fatal pipe bomb explosion at 
the Atlanta Olympics in 1996, campaigned for wide use of chemical 
markers in common explosives. Congress rejected these proposals and 
called for more study after the National Rifle Association and other 
groups opposed putting markers into black or smokeless powder, questioning 
the effectiveness of tagging such widely used products and expressing 
concern that foreign chemicals might affect the gunpowder's performance. 
The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 authorized 
the Treasury Department to study tagging explosives either for early 
detection or to help trace explosives after bombings. The department's 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms asked the National Research 
Council, part of the National Academy of Sciences, to examine the 
issues and it convened two committees to conduct studies. In a report 
released in March, the first committee looking at commercial high-grade 
explosives, like dynamite and military plastic explosives and chemical 
fertilizer used to make explosives, concluded that it was impractical 
to put markers into this material. It called for more research into 
cost, safety and effectiveness questions before considering such additives 
for wide use. The second committee, which released its report Thursday, 
reached similar conclusions concerning black and smokeless powder. 
Black and smokeless powders are sold commercially primarily to gun 
owners for reloading ammunition and for shooting muzzle-loading firearms. 
In addition to these legitimate uses, the panel said, the gunpowders 
can fuel explosive devices, most commonly pipe bombs. From 1992 to 
1996, the number of reported actual and attempted bombings involving 
black and smokeless powders averaged about 650 per year, the report 
said. In these incidents, about 10 people were killed, 100 people 
injured and about $1 million in property damage was reported annually. 
A significant number of those injured or killed, the panel noted, 
were people involved in building or transporting the bombs. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>