<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Like all recent modern-dress versions of the ballet classics, Matthew 
Bourne's ``Swan Lake'' can give one pause. ``Beware of those who stir 
the waters to suggest they are deep,'' as the Chinese saying goes. 
But Bourne, a 38-year-old British modern-dance choreographer does 
have something to say about reinterpretation, and it is about more 
than replacing women with men in a corps of swan creatures. Part cartoon, 
part spoof of the British royal family and part lyric poem, this rechoreographed 
``Swan Lake'' keeps remarkably close to the story and musical structure 
of the standard 1895 version of Tchaikovsky's ballet. It may not be 
as spectacular or profound as the 19th-century original, but it is 
a polished entertainment, clever in its choreography and uninhibited 
in its tender moments. It will make you laugh; it might even make 
you cry. The blaze of publicity stemming from the production's six-month 
run in London in 1996 and a brief engagement in Los Angeles last year 
has left the mistaken impression that this is an all-male version, 
with men dressed as women. But men are men here and women are women, 
and the production is decidedly co-ed. It would also be a mistake 
to see this version as a homosexual cult show. The hero, portrayed 
with remarkable nuance in dancing and acting by Scott Ambler as a 
Prince Charles type, is a melancholy royal heir with a domineering 
queen mother in 1950s dress. After he finds pure love in an ideal 
(a mythic male swan), he is seduced by its human double, a mod rocker 
in black leather. There is a homoerotic tinge to the male duets for 
Ambler and Adam Cooper in the dual swan role. (The principal characters 
have alternate casts.) But these duets are a springboard for a wider 
view of the production as a whole. You don't have to be of a particular 
sexual persuasion to have an unhappy childhood and seek escape in 
another world, even a dream. Nor does Cooper radiate anything but 
universal sex appeal. Intense and powerful, he twists into Bourne's 
quirky off-balance shapes for the muscular long-armed swans: with 
his punk good looks and mercurial speed, he plunges into the darting, 
insidious choreography for the swan's evil opposite. It is a terrific 
performance recalling the sexy dramatic vibes that Cooper, then in 
the Royal Ballet, gave off here in 1994 as Rudolf (another prince 
rejected by a cold mother), the Hapsburg heir obsessed with women, 
sex and death in Kenneth MacMillan's ``Mayerling.'' As for Bourne's 
own Prince, confused about his identity and the stifling court protocol, 
the point is that Bourne has only souped up his story's characters; 
he did not invent them. Poor old Tchaikovsky's score may have been 
pushed around over the last century, with interpolations and cuts, 
but the essential plot line of the 1895 ``Swan Lake,'' choreographed 
by Marius Petipa and Lev Ivanov, has remained the same. To wit, the 
hero is a melancholy prince with a domineering queen mother (she orders 
him to quit drinking and to marry) who finds pure love with an ideal, 
Odette (a maiden by night, a swan by day). He is also seduced by the 
ideal's human double, Odile (commonly known as the black swan). Does 
it make a difference that the swan leader is a male? Yes and no, for 
actually Bourne has tapped into an age-old literary symbol with powerful 
sexual connotations. Think of Zeus transformed into the swan abducting 
the Leda of Yeats' imagination. Consistent with that image, Bourne 
gives the male swans, both barefoot and bare-chested in feathered 
knickers designed by Lez Brotherston, ensemble dances that are predicated 
on aggressive poses. Bent over or arching with arms held back as wings, 
they whip into distortions of ballet turns. The vocabulary is limited 
and unballetic. Nonetheless, Cooper's signature pose in arabesque 
has his arm crooked over his head, recalling a famous photograph of 
Margot Fonteyn as Odette. As a choreographer, Bourne is at his sharpest 
and most inventive in parodies of social dances. His success is twofold: 
He offers a twist on set pieces from the original ballet and also 
works against the music's familiar associations. A scene-setting overture, 
conducted by David Frame for Bourne's company, Adventures in Motion 
Pictures, shows a child Prince (Andrew Walkinshaw) in bed with a stuffed 
swan. A vision of Cooper appears above in the same window in which 
Cooper will cradle the boy at the end, symbolizing the soul of a Prince 
driven to madness and death. Not to worry. The heavy stuff is still 
a long way off as Bourne uses the music celebrating the birthday of 
Siegfried, Tchaikovsky's Prince, to have squads of servants prepare 
Bourne's hero for his duties. There are royal in-jokes (a mechanical 
dog that resembles Queen Elizabeth's corgi). As the stage queen, Isabel 
Mortimer (who alternates with Fiona Chadwick) exudes both superciliousness 
and a sly breathlessness that goes with her implied nymphomania. The 
same waltz continues as the Prince greets the populace and acquires 
an instant girlfriend, Emily Piercy, who is ill behaved. Like the 
best of Soviet choreographers, Bourne knows how to give silent acting 
a solid rhythmic dance pulse. Rothbart, the magician who can release 
Odette from swanhood if a man is true to her, is turned here into 
a scheming private secretary (Barry Atkinson). He pays off the girlfriend, 
the owner of a nightclub where the Prince gets into a scandalous brawl, 
and he is obviously in cahoots with Cooper in the ballroom scene. 
This new subplot is about plotting. No wonder the Prince gets little 
comfort from a spoof of Romantic ballet, danced as the entertainment 
usually provided in Act I. Jerome Robbins has been funnier with butterfly 
ballets. Much better is a combative groping duet for the mother and 
the Prince to express their conflicts, although the drums here are 
unusually loud. And even better, to the tinkle of the goblet polonaise, 
are the stylized 1960s dances for assorted rough trade in the disco 
Ambler visits before superbly performing a disjointed solo of despair. 
The first lakeside scene is by a pond in a park where the Prince intends 
to commit suicide but is saved by his vision of swan heaven. Cooper 
leads the male corps, all with a black beaklike stripe on the forehead. 
The beak is echoed in the swans' cupped hand gestures. The adagio 
of discovery for Ambler and Cooper establishes their ambiguous relationship: 
embrace and rejection. The best solo in the production is Cooper's; 
his fast-flying leaps, elbow raised, are performed to the music for 
Odette's solo. Bourne hits his stride in the subsequent ballroom scene, 
where the usual waltz of the fiancees introduces a guest list from 
hell. A woman with a black eyepatch is a visiting German Princess, 
and a Fergie character with red hair dances on a table. The ethnic 
character dances are hilariously spoofed: Jacqueline Anderson and 
eight men stamp a great deal in the Spanish Dance and rotate their 
wrists so much it all spells hocus-pocus. But from now on it is Cooper's 
show. He enters on the edge of a balcony, licks the queen's arm (she 
likes it) and brandishes a riding crop. The black swan pas de deux 
becomes a struggle between the Prince and his mother over the same 
desires. After Cooper hoists the queen around, she whirls off and 
Ambler finds himself in a stylized tango with Cooper, who twists his 
arm. Just as Odile mimics Odette, Cooper paints a black stripe on 
his forehead. Whatever the Prince finds out about his true self, it 
hurts. At this point, the dramaturgy becomes murky. The Prince rushes 
in with a gun but the private secretary shoots the girlfriend and 
is prevented from shooting the Prince by the Queen. A coup d'etat? 
All is madness as Tchaikovsky's storm music ushers in the now nasty 
swans, whose dancing is accelerated and sharp, full of sudden turns. 
Why do they attack not only the Prince, but also the swan he loves? 
Is it the Prince's dream image of self-destruction, or has society 
killed its victims? Dance and drama are inseparable here, as they 
are in Petipa and Ivanov's version of ``Swan Lake.'' Bourne opts for 
their 19th-century apotheosis. The hero and swan figure unite in an 
afterlife, or life as it should be. PRODUCTION NOTES: `SWAN LAKE' 
Directed and choreographed by Matthew Bourne; music by Tchaikovsky; 
sets and costumes by Lez Brotherston; lighting by Rick Fisher; musical 
director, David Frame; orchestrations by David Cullen; sound by Mark 
Menard. Presented by Adventures in Motion Pictures, producing director, 
Katharine Dore, and by Cameron Mackintosh. At the Neil Simon Theater, 
250 W. 52nd St., Manhattan. WITH: Adam Cooper (The Swan), Scott Ambler 
(The Prince), Fiona Chadwick/Isabel Mortimer (The Queen), Emily Piercy 
(The Prince's Girlfriend), Barry Atkinson (The Private Secretary) 
and Andrew Walkinshaw (The Young Prince). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>