<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This year's New York Film Festival concludes on a note of uncommon 
grace. ``The Dreamlife of Angels,'' to be shown on Sunday night at 
8:30, begins simply and becomes a glimpse into an unexpected world. 
Though its two main characters, young Frenchwomen adrift and living 
hand to mouth, are rough-edged and scrappy, they wind up forming a 
bond of enormous delicacy. As that bond frays, this impassioned first 
feature by Erick Zonc reveals a soulful, moving vision of our shared 
responsibility for one another's lives. In a film whose two stars 
jointly won best actress honors at Cannes this year, the most immediately 
unforgettable figure is Elodie Bouchez's Isa (short for Isabelle). 
At 21, she's a scruffy opportunist toting her backpack through Lille, 
raising pocket money by hustling religious pictures to passers-by. 
She takes a factory job as a seamstress, failing dismally but winding 
up with a fellow worker, Marie (Natacha Regnier) as her new best friend. 
Marie couldn't care less about being a seamstress either. In a film 
that easily incorporates class struggle into its story and cares more 
about working-class experience than many a more openly political drama, 
she too lives strictly in the moment. Both woman are at an adventurous 
age, looking for opportunity wherever they find it and working only 
because they must. Then with the lovelorn blindness of a Dreiser heroine, 
Marie hitches her hopes to a wealthy man. Zonca, who cares more about 
emotional fire than social realism, depicts Marie's love affair with 
furious intimacy. It begins in a most unexpected way. Isa and Marie 
have been happily taunting bouncers at a club, mostly just for sport; 
Marie even has an affair with one of them (a hefty biker, played with 
incongruous tenderness by Patrick Mercado). The women have also harassed 
smug-looking Chris (Gregoire Colin), without realizing that he is 
the club's owner. One day Chris spots slim, pretty Marie while she 
is shoplifting a jacket and saves her from arrest. Rebellious but 
also secretly impressed, Marie lets Chris buy the jacket and buy her, 
too. With her big, toothy grin and rough features, Ms. Bouchez's Isa 
looks like the plainer of the two women at first. But as she rises 
to the occasion of befriending the badly confused Marie, she takes 
on an astonishing radiance, a glow of stirring compassion. ``She gave 
out an impression of serenity, grace and absolute confidence in life,'' 
Zonca has said of the young woman who inspired this story, and the 
luminous Ms. Bouchez (whose credits include Andre Techine's ``Wild 
Reeds'') summons that same spirit magnificently here. In the subplot 
from which the title comes, Isa learns of a comatose young girl (whose 
apartment she and Marie happen to be sharing) and avidly makes herself 
the girl's guardian, sharing in her fate. ``The Dreamlife of Angels'' 
escalates with frightening urgency as Marie loses her bearings. Wise 
in the ways of stubbornly wrongheaded love affairs, Zonca shows how 
sexually responsive she is to Chris' cruelty, and how easily sexual 
desperation drives a wedge between the friends when Isa counsels caution. 
In scenes of tumultuous intimacy, he watches the two feisty heroines 
fight out their differences. The two actresses perform with overwhelming 
naturalness, as if utterly locked into this conflict. Zonca had them 
live together while making the film, and it shows. In the end, this 
beautifully acted drama, as raw and immediate as it is heartfelt, 
describes much more than the fallout from friendship or a headstrong 
love affair. It leaves behind what Isa has discovered: the profound 
ties among the lives that are seen here, and the way those ties make 
sense of our world. PRODUCTION NOTES: THE DREAMLIFE OF ANGELS Directed 
by Erick Zonca; written (in French, with English subtitles) by Zonca 
and Roger Bohbot, with the collaboration of Virginie Wagon; director 
of photography, Agnes Godard; edited by Yannick Kergoat; art director, 
Jimmy Vansteenkiste; produced by Francois Marquis; released by Sony 
Pictures Classics. Shown with a 7-minute short, Lynn-Maree Danzey's 
``Fetch,'' Sunday at 8:30 p.m. at Alice Tully Hall as part of the 
36th New York Film Festival. Running time: 113 minutes. This film 
is not rated. WITH: Elodie Bouchez (Isa), Natacha Regnier (Marie), 
Gregoire Colin (Chriss), Jo Prestia (Fredo) and Patrick Mercado (Charly). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>