<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0053 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Atlanta Braves staged an improbable rally for a ninth-inning run 
off San Diego's usually implacable closer, Trevor Hoffman, to send 
Game 1 of the National League Championship Series into extra innings. 
But with one swing in the top of the 10th on Thursday morning, Ken 
Caminiti made sure that the Padres would keep intact their two-and-a-half-year 
streak of never losing a game in which they carried the lead into 
the ninth. Half an inning after the Braves had scratched out a run 
off Hoffman, Caminiti launched a one-out homer to left-center field 
off reliever Kerry Lightenberg to break a 2-2 tie. After closing out 
the Braves in the bottom of the 10th despite allowing two walks, including 
one to the pitcher Tom Glavine, who was pinch-hitting because the 
Braves had run out of position players, the Padres had a 3-2 victory 
to open the series. Donne Wall relieved Hoffman to record the final 
out, an Andres Galarraga fly ball to deep center. With Kevin Brown 
scheduled to start Game 2 here on Thursday night, San Diego has a 
chance to take a 2-0 lead over the heavily favored Braves before the 
four-of-seven-game series heads to San Diego. The odds against Atlanta 
coming up with a ninth-inning comeback were nothing short of astronomical. 
That's how good the Padres' bullpen has been over the last two and 
a half years. But Hoffman could not close out a Game 1 victory for 
Andy Ashby. Instead, the Braves tied the game on a one-out sacrifice 
fly from Andruw Jones. And so it was up to Caminiti to prolong the 
Padres' streak. Before the ninth-inning fireworks, it seemed that 
the game's decisive play would feature Ruben Rivera's daring base-running 
on a 45-foot Baltimore chop by another ex-Yankee, Jim Leyritz. Pinch-hitting 
for Wally Joyner with one out and Rivera on third base in the top 
of the eighth inning of a 1-1 ball game, Leyritz chopped a pitch from 
Dennis Martinez to the shortstop side of the pitcher's mound. Martinez 
looked Rivera back to third before tossing to first for what looked 
to be an easy out. But Rivera broke for home as soon as Martinez threw 
to first. Galarraga came off the bag early to throw home, but bounced 
his throw past catcher Javy Lopez as Rivera scored the tie-breaking 
run. Rivera had led off the eighth by doubling to left-center off 
the Atlanta starter, John Smoltz, and advanced to third on Caminiti's 
line out off the Atlanta left-hander John Rocker. On that play, Rivera 
barely beat Jones' bullet from center and overslid the bag at third. 
But instead of reapplying the tag, Chipper Jones chose to show the 
ball to third-base umpire Greg Bonin as Rivera crawled back to safety. 
The game began after a a 2-hour, 1-minute rain delay, and huge sections 
of the upper deck remained unpopulated, which hid the fact that the 
game was not sold out anyway. The announced attendance of 42,117 at 
Turner Field was about 8,000 seats shy of a sellout. ``You would think 
going in it's going to be a tightly pitched affair,'' Atlanta Manager 
Bobby Cox had said before the series. And, when the series finally 
began, neither Game 1 starter did anything to change anybody's mind. 
The right-handed Smoltz pitched his way out of a mess of his own making 
in the top of the first. Smoltz walked San Diego's leadoff hitter, 
Quilvio Veras, on a full count. With Veras running on a 2-1 pitch 
to Tony Gwynn, Smoltz fielded a comebacker but short-armed his throw 
to second. The ball skipped past shortstop Walt Weiss and into the 
outfield. Veras scampered to third, and the Padres had runners on 
first and third with nobody out. Vaughn followed with another comebacker 
as Gwynn took second and Veras held at third on the inning's first 
out. But, with runners now on second and third, Smoltz caught Caminiti 
looking at a 1-2 fastball, then induced Joyner into a groundout. The 
game was still scoreless in the top of the third when Andruw Jones 
golfed a breaking pitch from Ashby, the San Diego starter, over the 
left-field fence for a leadoff home run to give the Braves a 1-0 lead. 
Meanwhile, Smoltz was having trouble with his control. He allowed 
a bloop single to right to Carlos Hernandez to open the San Diego 
fifth. But after catching Chris Gomez looking at a called third strike, 
Ashby sacrificed Hernandez to second and Smoltz walked Veras on a 
full-count pitch. On Tuesday, Cox had been asked how to contain the 
San Diego lineup. ``Keep them off base in front of Tony Gwynn,'' Cox 
said. ``That's what Hank Aaron said this morning. So that's good enough 
for me.'' Now the 8-time National League batting champion, who batted 
.321 at the age of 38 this season, was coming to the plate with the 
tying run in scoring position. On Smoltz's first offering, Gwynn lined 
a run-scoring single over short for his second hit of the game to 
tie the score at 1-1. Smoltz fell behind Greg Vaughn, who hit 50 homers 
this season, on the first pitch. Vaughn drilled Smoltz's next pitch 
to deep right field, and only a sensational play by Tucker, who reached 
over his head to make the catch one step before crashing face first 
into the fence, temporarily saved Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>