<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0409 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the reporting season for corporate earnings begins, Wall Street 
analysts seem to agree that profits will decline a few percentage 
points in the third quarter, ending an almost seven-year run of intoxicating 
profit gains. The bigger question is what happens next. Will this 
be just a brief headache or are earnings going to turn into a real 
hangover? ``It is the great issue for the market now,'' said Thomas 
Doerflinger, an investment strategist at Paine Webber. What's worse, 
even if earnings growth resumes next year, will that be enough to 
put the stock market back on track? The fall in semiconductor stocks 
the last two days, despite indications that the industry is turning 
around, may mean that even moderate gains in profits won't be enough 
to satisfy the crowd. And while the Dow Jones industrial average recovered 
most of its losses by the end of trading Thursday, the Nasdaq Composite 
index, the market yardstick that measures the performance of many 
of the fastest-growing and most popular technology stocks, absorbed 
another sharp blow. Until recently, investors could almost count on 
pleasant surprises from companies reporting earnings that consistently 
exceeded expectations. That hope now seems to be vanishing and many 
investors are tuning out those strategists who continue to sing even 
a mildly positive tune. ``We're still looking for up earnings,'' said 
Byron Wien, the U.S. investment strategist at Morgan Stanley Dean 
Witter. ``And in almost every conversation I have with clients, they 
challenge me. `There is no way earnings will go up,' they say.'' The 
reaction Thursday to a new report from Abby Joseph Cohen, the closely 
followed market strategist for Goldman Sachs &AMP; Co. who has been 
a longtime bull, showed just how touchy investors were. In a note 
to Goldman clients before the stock market opened, Ms. Cohen said 
that she was lowering her forecast for operating earnings _ which 
are adjusted to remove the impact of one-time writeoffs and other 
charges _ for the stocks in the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500 index. That 
announcement helped send Wall Street sharply lower when the market 
opened. Still, her outlook remains quite positive in a climate where 
pessimism seems to be growing. She predicted that earnings for this 
year would end up about 5 percent above 1997 results and she forecast 
another 7 percent gain in 1999. That's down, but only a bit, from 
her earlier forecast of 8 percent growth for 1998 and 8.9 percent 
for 1999. Indeed, as Wien's and Ms. Cohen's forecasts show, a lot 
of big names on Wall Street continue to bet that any profit dip in 
the third quarter will be little more than a hiccup. While they are 
not expecting the percentile growth in earnings to roar back to the 
bullish double-digit pace of the mid-1990s, they are still counting 
on profits to keep improving. Douglas Cliggott, the U.S. equity strategist 
at J.P. Morgan Securities, is forecasting 2 percent earnings growth 
in 1999 even though his firm's economists predict a mild recession 
next year. Two forces drove the stock market forward during the incredible 
bull run that began in 1991. One was rapid earnings growth. The other 
was the flow of billions of dollars from ordinary investors out of 
other assets into stocks, powering Wall Street to record highs this 
summer even as earnings growth was really slowing down. With the bull 
market in retreat, strategists are looking for something to spur the 
market to climb again, to encourage investors to gaze over the valley. 
A return to steady earnings growth could fit the bill. But the performance 
this week of Advanced Micro Devices and other semiconductor stocks 
shows that even good earnings news may be easily overwhelmed by uncertainty 
about the current economic outlook. On Tuesday, Advanced Micro reported 
that strong sales of its K6-2 computer microprocessor had returned 
the company, unexpectedly, to profitability in the third quarter. 
Following better-than-expected earnings from Motorola the day before, 
it was a signal that the industry, which includes the chip giant, 
Intel, might be turning around. But Advanced Micro's stock plunged, 
falling 20.8 percent Wednesday and 11.1 percent Thursday. The Philadelphia 
semiconductor index, which tracks 16 companies in the industry, dropped 
3.4 percent Wednesday and another nine-tenths of 1 percent Thursday. 
According to several analysts, the chance for an overall earnings 
rebound requires several diverse elements to fall into place. The 
economy must avoid a recession, chip makers must make a comeback next 
year, energy prices need to stabilize near their current levels and 
the dollar has to come down to levels that help American exporters 
sell more abroad. All that is possible. But the price of oil, which 
had jumped 27 percent to $16.14 a barrel from Aug. 12 to the end of 
September, has dropped back this month to $14.42 a barrel. Alan Greenspan, 
chairman of the Federal Reserve, says the prospects for economic growth 
are worsening. And while the dollar is down sharply against the German 
mark and the Japanese yen from its highs this summer, it remains relatively 
strong against the currencies of America's other major trading partners. 
Ms. Cohen, Doerflinger and Wein are all expecting the economy to stay 
out of a recession. Doerfliner is forecasting earnings growth of almost 
7 percent next year and Wien is predicting 2 percent earnings growth. 
Ms. Cohen does acknowledge that Asia has still not bottomed out and 
that Latin America is showing ``unexpected weakness.'' Wien said that 
``the momentum of the economy is still good, consumer confidence is 
still good and the Fed is easing.'' Apart from the overall economy, 
these strategists argue that the hardest-hit industries, like semiconductors 
and energy, do not need to return to robust earnings growth but merely 
stop this year's slide to push 1999 earnings higher. According to 
Doerflinger, earnings from the energy industry plunged 29 percent 
in the first nine months of this year compared with the same period 
in 1997. ``If energy earnings are just flat, that would be an improvement,'' 
he said. The recent dollar decline will also add to the bottom line 
of a lot of U.S. companies next year if its exchange rates just stay 
where they are. A lower dollar means that earnings from abroad will 
increase when they are translated back into cheaper dollars. But not 
all strategists share this measured optimism about earnings. Marshall 
Acuff, the equity strategist at Salomon Smith Barney, and Mitchell 
Held, the firm's chief economist, are predicting a 1.1 percent decline 
in earnings next year. Held's forecast is based on a weaker economy, 
a rally in the dollar, continued poor performance from financial companies 
and downward pressure on profit margins _ because prices can't rise 
much and may even fall. For investors, this range of forecasts by 
market strategists may not be all that comforting. But it is clearly 
more in line with the current outlook and, thus, less likely to lead 
to the kind of profit disappointments that have sent stocks lower. 
The same cannot be said for the earnings forecasts assembled by the 
hordes of analysts who predict earnings for individual companies in 
the Standard &AMP; Poor's index of 500 stocks. These forecasters, 
according to First Call, are expecting an 18.1 percent surge in earnings 
next year. ``I would be happier if they were much lower,'' said Acuff. 
``Then I could say that stock market prices reflect the worst.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>