<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0023 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The custodian barged into the main office at the Garrison School, 
a look of alarm on his face. Two elderly men and a woman were wandering 
the property, he told the superintendent. Should he chase the trespassers 
away? Marilyn Brannigan knew at once that the uninvited guests posed 
no physical threat to the 298 elementary and middle school children. 
They were opponents of a plan to enlarge the little stone schoolhouse 
and had come to see the site and marshal new arguments before an Oct. 
20 referendum. This Putnam County hamlet is at odds over a school 
bond issue, with prosperous young parents squared off against retirees 
determined to hold the line on school taxes. It is a classic suburban 
slugfest, like those playing out in one community or another every 
day. Ho-hum, unless it's your children, your tax bill. One school 
board member got in a shoving match with 75-year-old Bob Rogers, an 
amputee who has a wooden leg, carved from a baseball bat. Rogers, 
confronted recently outside a community meeting, calls the building 
plan extravagant, the new gymnasium ``a regular Taj Mahal.'' One of 
Rogers' allies, Betsy Calhoun, 61, stirred rage in a quieter way. 
She distributed a list of teachers' salaries, arguing that paying 
them up to $70,000 a year was exorbitant. She has also questioned 
the need to teach two foreign languages. And what about special education? 
Ms. Calhoun says that's a boondoggle. There is no dispute that the 
school has outgrown its building, built in 1908, expanded in the 1960s 
and since untouched. The student population has been rising since 
the mid-1980s. But the overcrowding has more to do with pedagogical 
changes, like resource rooms for learning-disabled children and computer 
labs. To make room, classrooms have been cut in half, with some as 
narrow as railroad cars, so students must turn sideways and slither 
to the blackboard. Group projects are impossible in these cramped 
spaces. The gymnasium is too small for home basketball games. It doubles 
as an auditorium but cannot accommodate the whole student body for 
a concert. There are no locker rooms so children change for gym in 
a five-stall bathroom, leaving their clothes in heaps on the floor. 
The $5.9 million proposal would add six new classrooms and a 7,000-square-foot 
gymnasium with locker rooms; the old gym would be converted into a 
library and technology center. According to its proponents, taxes 
(currently the third lowest in a seven-county region) would increase 
a maximum of $195 a year, most of that offset by a school tax abatement 
program initiated by Gov. George Pataki, who makes his home in Garrison. 
``It's a good time to build,'' said Deborah Friedman, mother of a 
first grader, citing the abatement program, a one-time offer of state 
aid for school construction and the lowest interest rates in decades. 
A more modest referendum failed three years ago. Opponents of the 
plan, who seem a tiny but noisy minority, are willing to go along 
with only the new classrooms. They offer spartan solutions to the 
other problems, like using a gym in a nearby monastery for sporting 
events and having students use the public library for research projects. 
What about a locker room? ``I suggested putting a tent on the stage,'' 
Ms. Calhoun said. ``But every suggestion I make is sneered at. I'm 
trying to compromise with people who are really out of control.'' 
While the battle is typical, it has one distinctive element. Old-timers 
here recently took a huge financial hit because of a long-overdue 
countywide reassessment of real estate. Rogers' 40-year-old ranch 
house, for instance, was reassessed at $225,000, from $11,300. The 
retired electrician concedes the new assessment is fair though hard 
to swallow on a fixed income. Ms. Brannigan, the superintendent, reminds 
elderly opponents of an American verity: ``The senior citizens paid 
for you to go to school. They paid for your children to go to school. 
Now it's your turn.'' But she hasn't quieted their howls. That was 
left to Brian O'Donnell, editor of The Putnam County News &AMP; Recorder. 
O'Donnell this week declined to print a letter from Ms. Calhoun, saying 
that it was only fair that others be heard. And after Wednesday's 
edition of the weekly, everyone will be silenced. It is the paper's 
policy to close debate on a ballot issue two weeks before the vote 
so tempers have time to cool. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>