<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0416 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A federal judge in Pennsylvania dealt a blow Thursday to Allied Signal 
Inc.'s $9.7 billion hostile takeover bid for AMP Inc., ruling against 
Allied's current effort to seek AMP shareholders' written consent 
of its purchase offer. Allied said it would decide on Friday whether 
to proceed with the takeover effort. In a mixed decision handed down 
as the stock market closed Thursday, U.S. District Judge James Giles 
called ``unlawful'' a plan by Allied Signal to have shareholders, 
through written consent, amend the company's bylaws to gain control 
from the board of directors over AMP's shareholder rights plan, which 
includes an anti-takeover provision, or poison pill. The judge, who 
sits in the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, in 
a decision that largely favored AMP, also left intact the AMP board's 
action earlier this year to amend the poison pill, significantly reducing 
the percentage of shares an investor could buy before triggering the 
pill and making it non-redeemable by any board of directors, until 
Nov. 6, 1999. The action was taken after Allied announced its offer 
to buy the company, as well as a tender offer to purchase up to an 
18 percent stake in the company, and become AMP's largest shareholder. 
But in a partial victory for Allied, the judge temporarily prevented 
Allied's consent solicitation to expand AMP's board of directors until 
Allied states unequivocally that ``its director nominees have a fiduciary 
duty solely to AMP.'' Allied was seeking to expand and gain control 
of AMP's 11-member board of directors by adding 17 new members _ 14 
who sit on Allied's board and three Allied senior executives. It then 
hoped to give shareholders control of the poison pill, and ultimately 
rescind its non-redeemable clause. In a year that, before the stock 
market's recent declines, produced the largest amount of mergers and 
acquisitions in history _ most of them friendly _ Allied's hostile 
bid for AMP, a leading maker of electrical connectors, based in Harrisburg, 
Pa., has gained widespread attention. For one thing, Allied, a Morristown, 
N.J., maker of aerospace and automotive products, is continuing to 
pursue its cash offer for AMP despite Pennsylvania's reputation as 
a haven for companies because of its tough anti-takeover laws. Despite 
its recent financial struggles, AMP's perseverance is also noteworthy, 
even as a number of Wall Street analysts and several shareholders 
_ including members of the founding Hixon family _ have urged AMP 
to consider the Allied offer. Investors' initial reaction to the news 
was not positive. In after-hours trading, AMP's shares quickly fell 
as much as 7.6 percent, to $35. Late Thursday, the stock was trading 
at $37.50, down 37.5 cents. On the New York stock exchange, AMP closed 
at $37.75, down 12.5 cents. Allied Signal's stock closed Thursday 
at $34.50, down 18.75 cents. Several investors said Thursday that 
the judge's decision to uphold the poison pill was largely expected, 
given Pennsylvania's reputation as one of the toughest states in the 
country for hostile corporate takeovers. Pennsylvania gives corporations 
based there wide latitude in whether they want to entertain unsolicited 
purchase offers. They also said they thought that Allied could still 
proceed with its takeover offer. ``He's made it difficult for them 
to proceed,'' said Morton Pierce, a partner and head of the mergers 
and acquisitions practice at Dewey Ballantine, a Manhattan-based law 
firm. ``Generally people put up independent directors so you avoid 
conflicts of interest. In hindsight, they should have put up an independent 
slate. They certainly could pursue it with an independent slate, but 
they have to be willing to live with some delay.'' AMP officials said 
they were happy with the court's decision. ``We are pleased that the 
court has clearly recognized the conflicted nature of the Allied Signal 
slate of nominees,'' the company said in a statement. During a television 
interview, Allied's chief executive, Lawrence Bossidy, said he thought 
Allied would be able to comply with the judge's request and continue 
with its offer. Previously, Bossidy said that Allied would rescind 
its offer if AMP's poison pill was upheld. An Allied spokesman said 
that the company's lawyers were examining the judge's ruling and that 
a decision would be announced by 9 a.m. Friday about whether it would 
proceed with a tender offer to purchase up to 20 million shares of 
AMP's outstanding common stock for $44.50 a share. As of late Tuesday, 
investors owning more than 156.7 million, or 72 percent of the outstanding 
shares, had tendered them to Allied, the company said. ``If we feel 
that this is not a major obstacle to our consent solicitation, then 
we'll go ahead,'' said Mark Greenberg, an Allied spokesman. But ``if 
there's no way we can comply with the present slate'' of director 
nominees, ``we may terminate the offer.'' It is unclear how the judge's 
decision will affect legislation being considered by Pennsylvania 
lawmakers concerning AMP. Late Tuesday, the Pennsylvania House of 
Representatives passed legislation containing an amendment that would 
allow Allied Signal to call a special meeting of AMP shareholders 
to consider its $44.50 a share purchase offer. The legislation also 
rescinded severance packages, known as golden parachutes, put in place 
for a number of senior executives of AMP. AMP has sought to thwart 
Allied's offer in order to allow company executives time to show investors 
some results from a recently enacted profit-improvement plan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>