<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
GAME OF THE WEEK: Monday night, 8 p.m. Miami (3-1) vs. Jacksonville 
(4-0) KEY STATS: Dolphins (2) _ Pass defense ranking. Jaguars (14) 
_ Pass offense ranking. COMMENT: These Florida teams have never met. 
Now they do so in prime time Monday night. Expect the Jacksonville 
crowd to be wild and a nuisance for the Dolphins' offense _ so will 
the Jacksonville defense. Miami's pass defense has improved greatly 
in large measure because its pass rush is making great strides. End 
Jason Taylor leads there with five sacks. Jacksonville has shown wonderful 
poise winning close games on the road but expect its offense to shine 
in this matchup. The running of the rookie Fred Taylor starts the 
engine. And then Jacksonville will push the pedal to the floor on 
Mark Brunell passes, especially to Kennan McCardell, but also around 
the field to a variety of nifty receivers. This is the game where 
Jacksonville shows the nation why it is a serious Super Bowl threat. 
Jaguars, 33-20. SUNDAY 1 P.M. GAMES: Carolina (0-4) vs. Dallas (3-2) 
KEY STATS: Panthers (16) _ Sacks earned. Cowboys (59.8) _ Garrett's 
completion percentage. COMMENT: Jason Garrett has produced more than 
could be expected in absence of the injured Troy Aikman. Garrett has 
connected on 58 of 97 passes, has a long touchdown pass of 80 yards 
and has thrown only 2 interceptions. Carolina signed defensive free 
agents, including Kevin Greene, Greg Lloyd and Craig Newsome, and 
has nothing to show for it. The Carolina offense turned the ball over 
repeatedly last week against . Atlanta, but the defense could do little 
about it as the Falcons rolled up 51 points. Dallas won't score that 
many _ but more than enough. Cowboys, 24-10. Kansas City (4-1) vs. 
New England (3-1) KEY STATS: Chiefs (69-4) _ ('90s record with 30 
carries). Patriots (32.7) _ Cullors' kickoff return avg. COMMENT: 
The Chiefs under coach Marty Schottenheimer have long played good 
defense. And when the offense run the ball effectively, that defense 
gets more rest and is even stronger. A testament is their impressive 
record in the `90s when they rush the football at least 30 times. 
Schottenheimer is 5-0 against New England, but he has not recently 
played this new batch of improved Patriots. His team will find a faster, 
stronger crew with the AFC's top kickoff returner (Derrick Cullors) 
getting New England started. It is the New England defense that will 
take over from there. Watch the matchups between fleet Terry Glenn 
against the testy Chiefs secondary, especially cornerback Dale Carter. 
Patriots, 20-13. Pittsburgh (3-1) vs. Cincinnati (1-3) KEY STATS: 
Steelers (10-2) _ Cowher's record vs. Bengals. Bengals (plus 5) _ 
Takeaway-giveaway differential. COMMENT: The Bengals have struggled 
despite great improvement in taking care of the football. This used 
to be a turnover-laden team, but now Cincinnati is keeping the ball 
and taking it from offenses. And still losing. Not enough big or timely 
plays. Somebody needs to make a few. Carl Pickens and Darnay Scott, 
the Bengals' receivers, are candidates to do that. So is back Corey 
Dillion. And Neil O'Donnell (1 interception thrown in 117 passing 
attempts) should play well against his former teammates. It is an 
upset, a breakthrough game for Cincinnati. Bengals, 23-20. Washington 
(0-5) vs. Philadelphia (0-5) KEY STATS: Redskins (-11) _ Turnover 
differential. Eagles (-6) _ Turnover differential. COMMENT: Here are 
two teams with big headaches. Nothing is going right. Neither can 
sustain drives consistently. Neither can hold on to the ball. Neither 
is forcing enough turnovers. Washington, however, has more offense 
and should score steadily. Its passing offense ranks third in the 
NFC and averages 241.6 yards a game. Michael Westbrook leads the NFL 
460 receiving yards. He will prove a handful for the Eagles' defense. 
For Philadelphia, misery continues. For Washington, a small reprieve. 
Redskins, 28-17. Buffalo (1-3) vs. Indianapolis (1-4) KEY STATS: Bills 
(plus 5) _ Turnover differential. Colts (-7) _ Turnover differential. 
COMMENT: Can Buffalo possibly be interested and play with intensity 
after its huge upset of San Francisco? Was that a one-game season 
for the Bills and now they coast? Unlikely with leaders like Bruce 
Smith in the locker room. Look for the Bills to place great pass rushing 
heat on rookie quarterback Peyton Manning. Look for Bills running 
back Antowain Smith to break loose. The home team has won five of 
the past seven in this series, but Buffalo has won five of the past 
six overall. Buffalo wins it with the pass rush and the running game. 
Bills, 24-16. Tennessee (1-3) vs. Baltimore (2-2) KEY STATS: Oilers 
(2.9) _ George's average yards per carry. Ravens (31.5) _ Lewis' average 
yards per catch. COMMENT: We know that Ravens receiver Germaine Lewis 
is a little, fast guy, but c'mon. He is averaging a ridiculous 31.5 
yards per catch. Three passes to Lewis and the field is nearly covered. 
What is the problem with Eddie George and the Oilers' running game? 
It would seem George could fall over and gain 3 yards a pop. Lewis 
and George. Both worth watching. For both the trends continue and 
that means a Baltimore victory. Ravens, 17-9. SUNDAY 4 P.M. GAMES: 
San Francisco (3-1) vs. New Orleans (3-1) KEY STATS: 49ers (494.0) 
_ Offensive yards per game. Saints (284.8) _ Offensive yards per game. 
COMMENT: Steve Young is playing his best football. He is the first 
player in league history to pass for 300 yards and three touchdowns 
in four consecutive games. With one more 300-yard passing game, he 
ties Joe Montana's record of five straight. Young is showing mobility, 
a strong arm and wonderful decision making, despite the 49ers' shocking 
loss at Buffalo. Garrsion Hearst back is averaging 5.7 yards a carry. 
Jerry Rice is two games from breaking Art Monk's streak of catching 
at least one pass in 183 consecutive games. New Orleans is the only 
NFC team that has not lost a fumble. It will need that kind of mistake-free 
effort and then a major boost on defense to keep pace with San Francisco. 
Not this time. 49ers, 26-17. Chicago (1-4) vs. Arizona (2-3) KEY STATS: 
Bears (35) _ Rushing first downs. Cardinals (9) _ Defensive ranking. 
COMMENT: Hooray! Bears win! They beat Detroit last week for their 
first victory, with Erik Kramer lifting the passing game. In his last 
two starts, Kramer has a 114.3 quarterback rating (647 passing yards, 
6 touchdowns, 1 interception). And Curtis Enis is producing, leading 
all rookies with 280 rushing yards. But watch Cardinals back Larry 
Centers. He leads all backs with 24 catches for 147 yards. His routes 
out of the backfield give quarterback Jake Plumber a safe, short throw 
that helps produce first downs. Arizona has 11 takeaways (7 fumble 
recoveries), and its defense has improved from 27th last year to 9th 
now through five games. It will force turnovers that prove critical 
in this matchup. Cardinals, 19-13. Denver (5-0) vs. Seattle (3-2) 
KEY STATS: Broncos (8) _ Bubby Brister TD passes. Seahawks (25) _ 
No. 1 in sacks. COMMENT: Denver leads the league in points with 182; 
that is an average of 36.4 points scored per game. In the last four 
against Seattle, it has averaged 32.3 and won them all. Not this time. 
Seattle's defense rebounds after that nightmarish game in the rain 
and mud at Kansas City last Sunday. Look for the Seattle defense to 
shine and for Ricky Watters to outrush Terrell Davis. And receiver 
Joey Galloway vs. the Broncos secondary is a matchup quarterback Warren 
Move will seek early and late. Seahawks, 24-21. Jets (2-2) vs. Rams 
(1-3) KEY STATS: Jets (6) _ Sacks allowed. Rams (4) _ Winning streak 
in series. COMMENT: The Rams play after a bye, and the Jets enter 
having won a big game at home against Miami. Now the Jets seek to 
keep it going while the Rams hope to start something. The Jets shut 
down the Miami running game, and doing the same against the Rams won't 
be too much of a problem. But stopping their passing game is another 
thing. Isaac Bruce is by far a better receiver than anyone Miami has, 
and he deserves special attention. Keeping him in check and pressuring 
quarterack Tony Banks, flushing him from the pocket and forcing him 
to throw on the run, are the key essential for a Jets victory. It 
happens. Jets, 27-20. San Diego (2-3) vs. Oakland (3-2) KEY STATS: 
Chargers (36.5) _ Leaf's QB rating. Raiders (95.2) _ Run defense. 
COMMENT: The visiting team has won in the last four games in this 
series, but the Raiders will put a halt to that. San Diego owns the 
top-ranked run defense in the AFC (87.0 avg. yards allowed per game), 
and it will be fun watching to see if that defense can contain speedy 
Raiders back Napolean Kauffman. The Raiders are 8-3 when Kauffman 
rushes for 100 yards. The Chargers need Leaf to rise and improve and 
become more steady. He started fast (2-0) and has sunk (0-3). The 
Raiders will hound him, especially safety Eric Turner and cornerback 
Charles Woodson. Raiders, 28-24. SUNDAY NIGHT GAME, 8 P.M. Atlanta 
(3-1) vs. Giants (2-3) KEY STATS: Falcons (11) _ League-low rushing 
first downs allowed. Giants (7-3) _ At home under Fassel. COMMENT: 
The Giants usually play well at home under coach Jim Fassel. And they 
have been able to rebound from horrible games under Fassel, too. This 
is a big one, with Dan Reeves, the former Giants coach, returning 
as Atlanta coach. This game boils down to one thing: the Giants have 
been unable to run the ball, and the Falcons have not allowed a 100-yard 
rusher in 12 straight games. Can the Giants produce an instant running 
game? They will come close. And that will save them. Barely. Giants, 
19-17. (BYE WEEK: Detroit, Green Bay, Minnesota, Tampa Bay) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>