<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0481 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Seeking to forge a new relationship with the Korean people, Prime 
Minister Keizo Obuchi offered an unusually forthright apology Thursday 
for Japanese colonial occupation of the Korean peninsula early in 
this century. In the complex politics of apology, which play an important 
role in Japan's relations with its neighbors, Thursday's statement 
marked one more step toward greater public contrition for World War 
II, and South Korea seemed pleased. The Japanese statement came in 
a meeting with the visiting South Korean president, Kim Dae-jung. 
Past visits by South Korean leaders were also occasions for Japanese 
apologies, but this time the statement was given extra weight by being 
included in the joint declaration issued by the two leaders. ``Obuchi, 
looking back on the relations between Korea and Japan in this century, 
humbly accepted the historical fact that the Japanese colonial rule 
inflicted unbearable damage and pain on Korean people and expressed 
remorseful repentance and heartfelt apology for the ordeal,'' the 
statement said. The wording was based on a landmark 1995 speech by 
Tomiichi Murayama, who was then prime minister, about Japanese conduct 
during World War II. But in some ways Thursday's statement went further 
because it was part of an official declaration, while Murayama's speech 
had been personal. In addition, Murayama is a socialist who is outside 
the Japanese mainstream, while Obuchi is a central figure in the governing 
Liberal Democratic Party. Obuchi's statement was directed only at 
Korea. But if the Japanese government likes the response, it could 
be used as the basis for a more general official apology for Japanese 
conduct during the war. There was no immediate reaction from North 
Korea, with which Japan's relationship is extremely chilly. East Asia 
continues to be haunted by the war, even after 53 years, and Koreans 
and Chinese in particular are deeply suspicious that Japan feels insufficient 
remorse and might again become a military power if it had the chance. 
Japan, on the other hand, feels its neighbors are being unreasonable 
by demanding one apology after another from a country where the great 
majority of citizens have no memory of the war. The tensions are particularly 
great with Korea, which Japan brutally occupied from 1910 until the 
end of the war in 1945. Japan may have been willing to make an unusually 
humble apology in this case in part because President Kim is seen 
as a genuine peacemaker who wants to improve ties, rather than as 
a hostile figure who will use Thursday's statement to try to extort 
more aid. Indeed, Kim has gone out of the way here to talk about the 
need to build a ``future-oriented relationship.'' Kim also said South 
Korea would move quickly to relax its ban on Japanese music and movies, 
underscoring the thaw in relations. Within Japan, the apology seemed 
to get broad support, but some officials in the Liberal Democratic 
Party have complained, saying Japan helped Korea during the colonial 
period and has no need to apologize. South Korean newspapers welcomed 
the Japanese apology, with the Chosun Ilbo calling it a ``significant 
event'' and the Jong-ang Ilbo saying it had ``special meaning'' because 
it was focused on Korea rather than a general statement. Still, the 
resentments in Korea run deep, and many Koreans want to see not just 
words but also a broad effort by Japan to pay official compensation 
to Koreans who were war-time sex slaves of the imperial army or who 
were forced laborers constructing tunnels and doing other work in 
Japan for the war effort. So far Japan has offered informal private 
payments to the former sex slaves, but has refused to consider official 
compensation. Kim spoke frankly to the Japanese parliament, saying 
``doubts and mistrust'' about Japan are widespread in Asia because 
of Japan's reluctance to face the past. ``Japan needs true courage 
to look at the past squarely and respect the judgment of history,'' 
he declared. ``South Korea should also rightly evaluate Japan, in 
all its changed aspects, and search with hope for future possibilities.'' 
In one indication of the continuing tensions, Kim spoke to the parliament 
in Korean, even though he speaks fluent Japanese from his childhood 
in the colonial era. In the United States, he spoke in English to 
a joint meeting of Congress, but aides said it would be politically 
impossible for Kim to deliver an address in Japanese because of its 
bitter associations with the colonial period. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>