<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Thursday, Oct. 8: With 
confusion and division growing over what to do about the Serbian assault 
on the people of the Yugoslav province of Kosovo, it is essential 
not to lose sight of the most urgent issue, which is saving lives. 
Tens of thousands of ethnic Albanians have been driven from their 
homes in Kosovo by Serbian forces, and many will soon perish in the 
cold forests if the Serbs do not withdraw. Making it possible for 
the refugees to return home, and getting international assistance 
to them, should be the overriding objectives of Western diplomacy 
and potential military action. Eventually Kosovo must recover the 
large measure of autonomy it enjoyed before 1989, when Slobodan Milosevic 
came to power in Serbia and began a violent crackdown on the Albanian 
majority in Kosovo. But achieving that outcome is likely to take time 
and negotiation, and should not impede help for the refugees as winter 
approaches. That help can be provided only if Milosevic pulls his 
murderous forces out of Kosovo and keeps them out. Getting them off 
the streets but leaving them in barracks in Kosovo where they can 
resume the killing at any time is not good enough. Milosevic still 
has time to remove them voluntarily, but so far he has defied Western 
calls to do so. Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. envoy, has offered a generous 
deal to Milosevic, asking him to withdraw his forces and to restore 
some degree of autonomy while postponing for several years any resolution 
of the ethnic Albanian demand for independence. Given the Serbs' mistreatment 
of Kosovo, Milosevic does not deserve such a restrained approach, 
but the use of force should be a last resort. In this case, stability 
in the Balkans would ultimately be best served by giving Kosovo great 
autonomy but not full independence. If Milosevic rejects the U.S. 
plan, NATO warplanes and cruise missiles should attack Serbian military 
targets in Kosovo and in Serbia until he bends. Once Serbian forces 
are removed, and threatened with further NATO attack if they return, 
the refugees can begin heading home and international relief agencies 
can move in to provide them with food and building materials. No NATO 
infantry or armored units should be sent into Kosovo to evict the 
Serbs. That job should be done with air power. If some kind of peacekeeping 
force is eventually needed to help assure the safe resettlement of 
refugees, it ought to be drawn primarily from European armies. Republican 
members of the Senate Armed Services Committee are right to ask about 
these matters now, and Congress must be consulted before any U.S. 
military action is taken. The political complexities of Kosovo and 
divisions in NATO about the use of force may produce paralysis just 
when action is needed. The governance of Kosovo cannot be set right 
before winter comes, but thousands of refugees can be saved. When 
that work is done, the United States and its European allies can help 
Kosovo's ethnic Albanians regain the autonomy they should have. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>