<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After four years as governor, George Pataki has forged a strikingly 
broad appeal, propelling him to a 2-to-1 lead for re-election over 
his Democratic opponent, Peter Vallone, who has has barely registered 
in voters' minds, a statewide New York Times/CBS News Poll has found. 
Pataki, the poll also shows, has thoroughly overcome the view of him, 
once widely held, as an uncaring, ideological conservative out of 
step with the state, and the stigma of his having risen to power as 
the protege of Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, whose integrity many voters still 
seriously question. The governor, who won office as the candidate 
of conservatives upstate and on Long Island, now enjoys robust support 
across regional and party boundaries. A month before the Nov. 3 election, 
50 percent of voters surveyed favored Pataki, a Republican, against 
22 percent for Vallone and 6 percent each for B. Thomas Golisano, 
the Independence Party candidate, and Lt. Gov. Betsy McCaughey Ross, 
the Liberal Party nominee. Among likely voters, the governor's lead 
was 54 percent to 24 percent for Vallone, the New York City Council 
speaker. The race for attorney general is in a dead heat. The Republican 
incumbent, Dennis Vacco, has 38 percent to the 37 percent for the 
Democratic candidate, Eliot Spitzer. State Comptroller Carl McCall, 
a Democrat, has a wide lead over his Republican challenger, Bruce 
Blakeman, 41 percent to 19 percent. One-third of voters remain undecided. 
The poll, based on interviews conducted Oct. 1 to Oct. 6 with 1,066 
registered voters, has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 
3 percentage points. So far, Vallone has been utterly unable to galvanize 
support, even among Democrats and New York City residents. Just a 
month before the election, a large number of voters polled simply 
did not know enough to express any opinion about him, good or bad, 
though he has been a leading figure in city politics for more than 
a decade. And the support Vallone has is much weaker than Pataki's. 
Even with such gloomy news, Vallone can take some solace in that 35 
percent of voters said they might change their minds, and that even 
seemingly runaway races tend to tighten by Election Day. One of the 
few bright spots for Vallone was the finding that many voters are 
not yet paying much attention to this race, suggesting that some bold 
stroke, however unlikely, might galvanize their interest and tip the 
balance. Another was the continuing high popularity in New York of 
President Clinton: despite his troubles, 73 percent of registered 
voters approve of his job performance. In recent days, Vallone has 
made an avid defense of Clinton a centerpiece of his campaign, making 
him one of the few candidates for high office anywhere in the country 
to try to gain by embracing the president. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>