<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a nearly sleepless night that included watching replays of himself 
ignoring a baseball just a few feet away from him, Chuck Knoblauch 
acknowledged Thursday what thousands of others had seen at Yankee 
Stadium and on television: that he made a mistake in not retrieving 
the ball on the play that led to a Yankee playoff loss Wednesday evening. 
``I screwed up,'' said Knoblauch, the first of eight times he used 
that phrase in an interview. ``I screwed up the play, and I feel terrible 
about that. I should have went and gotten the ball, regardless of 
what the outcome of the umpire's call was.'' He added: ``I need to 
apologize to my teammates and my manager and all the Yankees fans.'' 
Knoblauch's lapse came against the Cleveland Indians in the 12th inning 
of Game 2 of the American League Championship Series. With the score 
tied at 1-1, Cleveland's Travis Fryman put down a sacrifice bunt, 
and as he sprinted toward first base, the throw from Tino Martinez 
hit Fryman in the back and rolled behind Knoblauch, who was covering 
first. As Knoblauch stood screaming at the umpires, pleading for an 
interference call, Enrique Wilson, who had been on first base, kept 
running and scored the go-ahead run. An interference call would have 
meant Fryman was out and Wilson would have had to return to first 
base. The Indians won, 4-1, to tie the four-of-seven-game series at 
1-1, with Game 3 to be played in Cleveland on Friday night. There 
were other reasons the Yankees lost, including missed opportunities 
with runners in scoring position, and even another culprit on the 
play, because Martinez made an errant throw into Fryman's back. But 
Knoblauch's lapse was the flashpoint, made him an instant goat with 
fans and the topic of conversation in the baseball world and around 
New York. In an interview with reporters at Jacobs Field on Thursday, 
Knoblauch said everything seemed to happen so quickly when he was 
in the middle of the play. He was convinced that Fryman, who ran on 
the grass infield as he headed to first, had violated the rule requiring 
runners to stay in the basepath, and Knoblauch said he lost track 
of time as he argued the call. But after the Yankees arrived here 
late Wednesday, he turned on the television in his hotel room and 
saw over and over _ at regular speed and in slow motion _ the misplay 
that made him famous. It was ``almost like times stands still,'' he 
acknowledged Thursday, saying repeatedly that he had blown the play. 
This admission was a reversal of his comments immediately after the 
game, when he stood at his Yankee Stadium locker and told reporters 
that he just did not see the ball, that he would not have done anything 
differently and that there was no reason to feel embarrassed. Even 
if Knoblauch believed he had not done anything wrong, he began to 
understand that all others who saw the play felt differently. The 
Yankee Stadium crowd booed him heavily when he batted in the bottom 
of the 12th, and the media horde around his locker after the game 
peppered him with questions about the play. Other Yankees began consoling 
him in an understated manner, as they would for any teammate making 
an error in a regular-season game. ``In a moment like that, you need 
some support sometimes and it was nice to have guys come up and have 
Mr. Steinbrenner come up and talk to me,'' said Knoblauch, referring 
to the team owner George Steinbrenner, ``and basically tell me to 
keep my chin up.'' Knoblauch talked about the play with others on 
the flight to Cleveland, including the team counselor, Fran Pirozzolo. 
At about noon Thursday, Knoblauch bumped into Yankees media relations 
director Rick Cerrone and asked if he could speak to reporters before 
Thursday afternoon's workout, arranging his mea culpa. Knoblauch then 
spoke at length with Yankees manager Joe Torre before marching into 
a packed interview room. A runner scoring from first base, Knoblauch 
said, ``should never happen on a play like that.'' What about the 
fans who booed him? ``From their perspective, they were booing me 
screwing up the play,'' Knoblauch said, ``and you can't fault them 
for that. They're going to react to what they see.'' The play comes 
near the end of what has been a difficult season for Knoblauch, professionally 
and personally. Acquired in a trade with Minnesota in mid-February 
and immediately hailed as the Yankees' best lead-off hitter since 
Rickey Henderson in the 1980s, Knoblauch fell into a chronic problem 
making short throws in spring training, and through the early part 
of the season, his batting average hovered around .250. Knoblauch 
solved his throwing troubles in July and had a binge of home runs 
_ he finished with a career-high 17 _ but the newfound power began 
working against him. Knoblauch's level swing turned into an uppercut 
and his batting average plunged. His defense improved markedly in 
the last six weeks of the regular season, and he began spraying line 
drives in the final 15 days to finish with a .265 average. All year, 
Knoblauch has coped with the progressive illness of his father, Ray, 
who has an aggressive form of Alzheimer's disease. Knoblauch stood 
alone at his locker in Cleveland after Thursday's workout, thinking 
more about the play. ``You wish things like that wouldn't happen,'' 
he said, ``but somewhere, there's reasons for everything happening. 
My intentions were not to let the ball sit there and let the guy score 
and cost us the game. That's not what I'm all about. You think about 
it, and you come to the reality that you can't change anything and 
that you made a mistake and you screwed up, and try to move on.'' 
David Cone, Paul O'Neill and Chili Davis all said they felt Knoblauch 
was strong enough to get through his adversity. Said Cone: ``I was 
really happy to see him be a stand-up guy about it. It was the right 
thing to do. He can come out and have a good night tomorrow night 
and play well.'' A reflective Torre said he thought about Chicago 
Cubs outfielder Brant Brown, who dropped a fly ball in the last week 
of the season and cost the Cubs a game. When Chicago clinched the 
National League's wild-card berth by winning a playoff game, Torre 
said, he was happy that Brown would not have to live with knowledge 
that his mistake had been pivotal. Now, one of Torre's own players 
is in a similar situation. Should the Yankees lose this series and 
end their remarkable season, Knoblauch's lapse will likely be viewed 
as the turning point, rightly or wrongly. ``You don't want somebody 
labeled like that,'' Torre said. ``I'd like to win for reasons other 
than that, but that would be a great eraser for this whole thing.'' 
Three more Yankees victories in this series may be the only way Knoblauch 
won't be remembered for his blunder. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>