<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some say the end will come by fire, and some by ice, but I say farce 
is just as likely. Oh, probably not the farce that consumes all Washington 
at this very moment. This one we may survive so long as the public 
keeps jeering at those grave suited gents who keep staring into television 
cameras and saying, ``It's not about sex.'' Heaven forfend that anyone 
should think it's about sex! (You've heard them say this; I merely 
paraphrase.) It's about the Constitution. It's about little Jamie 
Madison and the sanctity of law and Paula Jones' right to a trial 
untainted by perjury, no matter how lofty the perjurer. It's about 
the honor of that great white house on Pennsylvania Avenue and the 
great office it contains. It's about the American family and the American 
home, it's about the flag and Mom's apple pie, about the preservation 
of the two-pants suit and the Brooklyn Dodgers. Or whatever suits 
and Dodgers have become since the screenwriters of 1942 concocted 
these speeches about what was worth fighting for. What do we have 
here? A gray-haired authority figure, verging on second childhood, 
finds himself revisiting the forbidden adolescent vices. And in his 
place of business. And, of course, with a woman not half his age, 
though even younger than that emotionally. It's a comedy that was 
already too shopworn for Moliere 300 years ago. What makes it high 
farce in our age is the high-minded debate about whether it's a high 
crime and misdemeanor. Meanwhile, back at the media, the solemnity 
of the matter provides license to dish out the ever-loving, socko-for-circulation, 
lubricious details about body parts, said details provided by Kenneth 
Starr in the cause of justice. Until the press turned into the media, 
I suspect, this kind of circus would have had trouble getting into 
town. Back in the Bronze Age when I first reported for Washington 
duty, the personal vices of politicians and statesmen were not considered 
to be news of consequence. The press' old-timers have since taken 
a lot of scolding for this. Indeed, among media people it is now considered 
such a shameful betrayal of the industry's duty to tell absolutely 
everything that I hesitate to confess to having once lived by that 
antique code. That many politicians dabbled in illicit sex while other 
politicians reveled in it was well known to most reporters of that 
day. Many could cite names and occasions. That these dabblings and 
revelings should be widely advertised to the entire population, including 
nuns, Boy Scouts and cat lovers, was a proposition I never heard seriously 
entertained until the ``Cold War'' began to ease off. Until then, 
Washington was such a big, vital, all-absorbing story that reporters 
lacked the idle hours necessary for philosophical musings on the ethics 
of one's trade. The Washington story was too exciting for any sensible 
reporter to try peddling political adulterers to the home office. 
There was the H-bomb _ thousands of H-bombs, in fact. There were Berlin 
crises, Cuba crises, dangerous old Red China, subversion everywhere, 
oppression, torture . . . Reporters assumed that carnal sin was another 
of the many deplorable commonplaces of the human condition, hence 
a problem for clergy to cope with, certainly not the concern of reporters, 
many of whom were themselves no strangers to vice. As a reporter, 
I was untroubled by skipping the sex lives of the government famous 
in my dispatches. Nor have I ever been persuaded that the reader was 
betrayed or the world endangered by letting these birds have a little 
privacy. It is now said that details about the vices of politicians 
must be told to all humanity so that the public can make vitally important 
judgments about their ``character.'' I doubt it. It has never been 
clear to me that the sexual adventurings of Franklin Roosevelt, John 
Kennedy and Martin Luther King affected the creation of the New Deal, 
the conduct of World War II and the Cuban missile crisis, or the progress 
of the civil rights movement. Quite possibly, I suspect, had this 
stuff been known at the time, the principals would have been so tied 
up by lawyers that the Nazis would have won the war, the Soviet Union 
would have blown up the world, and slavery would now be making a comeback. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>