<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0321 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iran said Thursday that its troops had clashed with Taliban forces 
along the Afghan border and inflicted heavy casualties in a skirmish 
between neighbors who have been in a tense standoff. The reported 
fighting, which followed more than two months of bellicose statements 
from both sides, would be the first between Iran and the Taliban, 
whose rival interpretations of Islam have contributed to open hostility. 
A Taliban spokesman, Wakil Ahmed, denied to an Afghan news service 
that any conflict had taken place, and that Taliban forces near the 
border had not to responded to what he said had been three days of 
Iranian artillery fire. Ahmed said the report of a military clash 
was ``propaganda against the Taliban.'' Iran, led by a Shiite Muslim 
government, has massed some 270,000 troops along the Afghan border 
after recent victories by the Sunni Muslim Taliban, the militant Islamic 
movement that has gained near-total control of Afghanistan. The main 
flashpoint in the crisis has been the killing in August of at least 
eight Iranian diplomats based in Afghanistan. The Taliban, who have 
acknowledged that their forces carried out the slayings, have vowed 
to prosecute those responsible, but the Iran has warned of possible 
military retaliation. Iranian President Mohammed Khatami has said 
Iran will work through diplomatic channels to settle its differences 
with the Taliban but is prepared to use force if diplomacy fails. 
Hours before Thursday's reported clash, Iranian Foreign Minister Kamal 
Kharrazi said: ``We do not discount using military force to fulfill 
our demands. There is a certain limit to our restraint with the Taliban.'' 
Thursday's clash, reported by the official Iranian press, was the 
first described by either side since the standoff began with the Aug. 
8 killings, and it raised the specter of broader fighting between 
the two sides. The Iranian account, broadcast on television and repeated 
by the official government press agency, said three Taliban border 
posts had been ``completely destroyed'' during three hours of fighting 
that took place about 110 miles southeast of the Iranian city of Mashaad. 
It quoted Brig. Gen. Azizollah Jaafari, commander of the ground forces 
of Iran's elite Islamic Revolutionary Guards, as saying that his force 
stood ready to respond to any further ``provocations'' by the Taliban, 
who he said had opened fire Thursday morning with mortars and automatic 
weapons. Jaafari said that the Taliban had been ``forced to retreat'' 
and that the situation along the border was ``currently calm.'' Brig. 
Gen. Abdolali Pourshasb, the commander of Iran's ground forces, said 
in an Iranian television report Thursday that the large Iranian force 
along the border was nearly ready to begin major maneuvers for which 
preparations have been underway for nearly a month. Iran, a key backer 
of the Taliban's military opponents in Afghanistan, has looked with 
misgivings on developments inside that country ever since the militant 
Islamic militia took control of the capital, Kabul. Faithful to Islam's 
minority Shiite wing, it has accused the Taliban, who follow what 
they say is a purist version of the dominant Sunni faith, of being 
embarrassments to Islam. Like the United States and the United Nations, 
Iran still recognizes the deposed government of President Burhanuddin 
Rabbani as Afghanistan's legitimate leadership. As the price for a 
possible settlement with the Taliban, Iran has demanded a formal apology 
for the killing of the diplomats and the release of some 40 Iranians 
still being detained. It has also demanded that the Taliban surrender 
to international authorities those responsible for the killings, and 
that it return to Iran the bodies of the two diplomats not among those 
flown to Tehran last month. But the Taliban has insisted on prosecuting 
the killers itself, and it has said that any further goodwill gestures 
must be the product of international mediation. The United Nations' 
special envoy on Afghanistan, Lakhdar Brahimi, an Algerian diplomat, 
is in the region in an effort to resolve the crisis. Brahimi spent 
four days in Iran this week, and is now in Pakistan for meetings with 
Pakistani and Taliban officials. He said before leaving Iran that 
the killing of the Iranian diplomats had created serious tensions 
and dangers for the entire region. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>