<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0399 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The NATO effort to persuade Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic 
to back down is following a clear track, senior U.S. and NATO officials 
said Thursday. It is designed to ratchet up the political and military 
pressure, while providing him various opportunities to change his 
mind. First, U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke will try to win Milosevic's 
compliance during a last-ditch mission to Belgrade beginning Friday. 
If Holbrooke fails or if his mission is protracted, NATO countries 
will vote this weekend or early next week to increase his leverage 
by giving the last required permission to the NATO supreme commander, 
the Gen. Wesley K. Clark, to begin air strikes against Serb positions 
and troops. That go-ahead _ known as an activation order _ requires 
the unanimous vote of all 16 NATO members. Afterwards, Clark could 
proceed on his own timetable. But first NATO intends to make a significant 
display of its preparations _ the forward deployment of attack aircraft, 
for instance. The military plan has already been agreed upon: a series 
of phased attacks, intensifying at each step, with pauses built in 
to allow Milosevic and his military commanders to back down. The last 
phase, which would involve a very intensive attack on military installations 
anywhere in Serbia may require another NATO political vote first, 
the officials say. The same pattern held true when NATO bombed Milosevic 
to the bargaining table in 1995, over Bosnia, and NATO never did have 
to go to the final stage of its attack. If Milosevic does not respond 
to the pressure, he faces severe punishment, said Clinton's national 
security adviser, Samuel Berger. ``If he simply intends to defy the 
will of the international community,'' he said, NATO's goal will be 
``to destroy his capacity to inflict violent repression on the Kosovars.'' 
Milosevic's main backing is in the security forces and special police, 
not in the regular Yugoslav military, which is not likely to want 
to have its expensive air-control and command systems blasted by NATO. 
NATO's aim is not to destroy Milosevic but to persuade him to comply. 
The point, a senior NATO official said, is to push Milosevic to negotiate 
and to allow aid to get to the refugees and enable them to go home. 
``NATO has no intention of going to war against Serbia or on behalf 
of an independent Kosovo,'' the official said. Milosevic, the Clinton 
administration official said, has only pulled out of Kosovo about 
60 percent of the troops and special police that NATO is insisting 
leave. Milosevic must withdraw the forces sent into Kosovo since February 
and keep in barracks the forces normally stationed in Kosovo, the 
officials said. Before February, there were 12,500 troops in Kosovo 
and some 6,500 special police, U.S. officials said. After the buildup 
and a partial withdrawal, there are still some 18,000 troops and 11,000 
special police, the officials said, and while some of the troops are 
in barracks, none of the special police are. A new rift is emerging 
within NATO, however, officials said. If Milosevic complies, NATO 
wants clear verification procedures to monitor his continued compliance, 
so that his troops don't pour back in to Kosovo. To do that, the West 
will need more than the 50 or so diplomatic observers currently in 
Kosovo. Some NATO countries feel strongly that a number of NATO ground 
troops must be used, in addition to troops from other organizations, 
for adequate monitoring. U.S. officials, reluctant for political reasons 
to put U.S. ground troops into Kosovo, are against the use of NATO 
troops, though the use of NATO aircraft and intelligence-gathering 
is foreseen, officials say. It is only in the last few days that Milosevic 
has begun to take seriously NATO's threat to use force, the administration 
official said. The NATO official was blunter: ``Milosevic doesn't 
doubt NATO's capacity to carry out these attacks, but he does doubt 
our will. We have to convince him. He's tuned out to hints, obviously. 
So the question becomes whether you just have to shout more loudly, 
or actually hit him before he gets the point.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>