<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0021 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dan Reeves isn't the New York Giants coach anymore, but as he prepares 
to bring his Atlanta Falcons to Giants Stadium this weekend, he's 
still having an impact on Giants practices. The Giants moved part 
of their practice indoors Wednesday to keep it secret, and later had 
a Giants security official scanning the high-rise buildings that overlook 
the team's outdoor practice field with high-powered binoculars because 
they feared that friends or associates of Reeves might be spying on 
the team's workouts this week. The Giants, a team official said, had 
taken the precautions because they had been told that Joe DeCamillis, 
an Atlanta assistant coach who was also an assistant under Reeves 
with the Giants, had planned to use his familiarity with the area 
and the buildings surrounding the Giants practice fields to position 
someone to spy on practices. It is routine, even expected, that National 
Football League coaches will suspect that opposing teams are trying 
to steal their game plans or individual plays. It's almost part of 
football lore and the players hardly mind, since they have grown accustomed 
to the stratagem. But Reeves' past ties to the Giants gave Wednesday's 
tidbit added bite. In an interesting twist, Reeves, when he was Giants 
coach, often used to remark _ with some annoyance _ how easy it might 
be for someone to rent a room in the hotel and surreptitiously film 
or scout Giants practice. DeCamillis, who is also Reeves' son-in-law, 
Wednesday denied he had ever said anything about spying on the Giants 
this week. ``I ain't doing anything like that,'' DeCamillis said in 
a telephone interview from the Falcons' offices. With a laugh, he 
added, ``I wish I had time to do that.'' DeCamillis said: ``Coach 
Reeves would be angry if he knew someone did that. I would never say 
something like that. I would never do something like that.'' Giants 
coach Jim Fassel did not want to comment on why he concealed the earliest 
part of Wednesday's workout _ a portion of practice when new plays 
designed for the Falcons game are explained to the team and implemented 
in slow detail on the field. Fassel moved the players inside a facility 
next to the stadium that is surrounded by an opaque plastic bubble. 
The Giants usually practice inside the bubble only when it rains or 
snows. Fassel also declined to comment on why the Giants had high-powered 
binoculars trained on the windows of two buildings, an office building 
and a Sheraton hotel. The buildings are several hundred yards away 
from the practice fields adjacent to Giants Stadium, but rooms on 
one side of the buildings have a clear, unobstructed view of the practice 
area. Fassel did tell members of the team Wednesday that he didn't 
think he was paranoid for being so secretive. He considered it a precaution, 
since someone with a trained football eye might be able to learn something 
from watching the team's practices, which are closed to the public. 
In fact, Fassel moved the practices inside Giants Stadium where there 
is more privacy before the Giants' division-clinching victory over 
Washington last December. Fassel believes his secretiveness in that 
case may have been worth it. Giants players Wednesday were preparing 
to face Reeves in other ways, acknowledging that their former coach 
has turned around the once hapless Falcons. ``They've got some good 
players, and he's got them believing in his system,'' defensive end 
Michael Strahan said. ``That happened when Dan came here in 1993, 
too. It doesn't really surprise me.'' Linebacker Corey Widmer said 
he knew Reeves would land on his feet wherever he went after his Giants 
tenure. ``You don't survive and thrive in pro football for 30-something 
years as a player and coach without having a lot going for you,'' 
Widmer said. ``I have a lot of respect for Dan. He's played in Super 
Bowls and coached in Super Bowls. I knew he'd be successful again.'' 
Fassel said Wednesday that he had addressed his team about what effect 
Reeves' return to Giants Stadium might have on the game. ``I didn't 
say anything in a derogatory way,'' Fassel said. ``I'm sure there 
are a lot of different feelings and I just talked about how we handle 
that and how we deal with that.'' Fassel added: ``I don't think there 
is any question that Dan will get his team fired up to come in here 
and play. I'm sure it means a lot to him.'' EXTRA POINTS _ Safety 
SAM GARNES (foot) did not practice Wednesday. There continues to be 
some difference of opinion over what the proper course of treatment 
is for Garnes, who may need foot surgery if he continues to play. 
The Giants have said that Garnes aggravated an old stress fracture 
in his right foot, but the injury may be worse than that. _ Center 
DEREK ENGLER (ankle), linebacker SCOTT GALYON (Achilles' heel), defensive 
tackle ROBERT HARRIS (strained chest muscle) and cornerback PHILLIPPI 
SPARKS (sore shoulder) also did not practice, but they have been listed 
as probable. Galyon has been out since the Giants' second game. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>