<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When it comes to staying on the cutting edge of urban realism, police 
movies have increasingly fallen behind television drama in evoking 
the texture of urban life. And Bruno Barreto's film ``One Tough Cop,'' 
although strongly acted and pungently written (by Jeremy Iacone), 
is no exception. Despite a hearty two-fisted performance by Stephen 
Baldwin as the tattooed lug of a main character, the movie feels faintly 
old hat as well as mechanically contrived. ``One Tough Cop'' is adapted 
from an autobiographical novel by Bo Dietl, a highly decorated New 
York City police detective who fancied himself a kind of Dirty Harry 
in the 1980s and was eventually punished for bending the rules by 
being exiled from Manhattan to a remote section of Brooklyn. He was 
only 35 when he retired in discouragement from the force. The story 
takes off from a notorious 1981 crime in which two men broke into 
an East Harlem convent school and raped and tortured a young schoolteacher. 
The movie isn't so much about how the fictionalized Bo helped solve 
that crime only to be denied official credit as about its impact on 
his professional and personal relationships. The East Harlem incident 
(in the movie the rape and torture culminate in the nun's murder after 
47 crosses have been carved into her body) is so highly publicized 
that a special police task force is assigned to the case. Disobeying 
orders, Bo and his loyal partner Duke Finnerty (Chris Penn) continue 
to work on the case, based on a tip from Rickie La Cassa (Mike McGlone), 
Bo's oldest and closest friend, a petty mafioso whose restaurant is 
officially off-limits to Bo. Bo nevertheless visits the place regularly, 
and it is there that he and Duke brutally grill an informant Rickie 
has dug up through the underworld grapevine. Coincidentally, Bo's 
relationship with Rickie, whom he loves as a brother, is being scrutinized 
by a pair of icy federal agents who issue Bo a blunt threat: either 
he installs a recording device in Rickie's car or they destroy his 
career with surveillance information they have gathered. At the same 
time, Duke, a compulsive gambler and alcoholic who once saved Bo's 
life, is accruing thousands of dollars in gambling debts to Rickie's 
underworld friends. To cap things off (most improbably), Bo begins 
an affair with Rickie's ex-girlfriend Joey (Gina Gershon), who left 
Rickie after giving up hope of his ever leaving his wife and family. 
It's easy to see why Baretto chose this material. The Brazilian director, 
whose last movie ``Four Days in September,'' examined the moral ambiguities 
of radical terrorism in Brazil in the late 1960s, is fascinated by 
the excruciating choices facing people in extreme circumstances. In 
this movie, the director is unambiguously pro-Bo and against the manipulative 
bureaucracies that he lashes out against. But ``One Tough Cop'' has 
more story than it can comfortably handle, and as it goes along it 
grows progressively less believable. So much screen time is devoted 
to setting up the conflicts that when things finally unravel, the 
denouement feels rushed and anticlimactic. While officially tying 
up the loose ends, it leaves you emotionally hanging. ``One Tough 
Cop'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). 
It has scenes of violence, profanity and sexual situations. PRODUCTION 
NOTES: ONE TOUGH COP Directed by Bruno Barreto; written by Jeremy 
Iacone, based on the novel ``One Tough Cop'' by Bo Dietl; director 
of photography, Ron Fortunato; produced by Michael Bregman and Martin 
Bregman; released by Stratosphere Entertainment. Running time: 90 
minutes. This film is rated R. WITH: Stephen Baldwin (Bo Dietl), Chris 
Penn (Duke Finnerty), Mike McGlone (Rickie La Cassa), Gina Gershon 
(Joey O'Hara), Paul Guilfoyle (Frankie ``Hot'' Salvano), Amy Irving 
(FBI Agent Jean Devlin) and Victor Slezak (FBI Agent Bruce Payne). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>