<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Under a national settlement being negotiated by the tobacco industry, 
cigarette makers would not be required to pass along to consumers 
the cost of the deal, a price increase that many anti-smoking advocates 
have said is critical to reducing under-age tobacco use. As part of 
federal legislation that failed earlier this year, cigarette producers 
would have been required to pass along the cost _ about $1.10 a pack 
_ to consumers. Though there is disagreement over the precise impact 
of price increases on teen-age cigarette use, many public health experts 
have held that such increases represent a major weapon in reducing 
smoking by young people. But the $198 billion national settlement 
deal being negotiated by lawyers for the industry and eight states 
would allow cigarette makers to absorb part or all of its costs, several 
lawyers briefed on the proposal said. That means that producers may 
choose for competitive reasons to hold down cigarette prices or decide 
the pace of how they will pass along the settlement's cost. The plan 
would cost producers 35 to 40 cents a pack over the next five years, 
industry officials and an analyst estimated. ``I think they will increase 
cigarette prices slowly to get consumers used to the higher price 
increases,'' said Bonnie Zoller, a tobacco industry analyst with the 
Credit Suisse First Boston Corp. ``A sharp increase in prices could 
cause a drop in consumption.'' Opponents of smoking and some economists 
have argued that a sharp, significant increase in cigarette prices 
could provide the most effective way to reduce teen-age smoking. In 
May, for example, Lawrence Summers, deputy treasury secretary, testified 
before Congress that the Clinton administration believed that the 
``best way to combat youth smoking is to raise the price.'' Summers 
testified that studies showed that every 10 percent increase in cigarette 
prices could produce up to a 7 percent decrease in the number of children 
who smoked. But other economists have called those projections overly 
optimistic. The structure of the settlement proposal, which has not 
been completed, is fundamentally different from the failed federal 
tobacco legislation because it leaves the timing of any cigarette 
price increases up to the producers. Regulators briefed on the current 
talks said they did not have the legal authority to require cigarette 
makers to pass along a settlement's cost because the negotiators were 
resolving lawsuits, not passing legislation. Since last year, tobacco 
companies have reached settlements with four states _ Florida, Minnesota, 
Mississippi and Texas _ that have brought lawsuits against the industry 
to recover smoking-related health costs, agreeing to pay those states 
some $40 billion over the next 25 years. To reflect the cost of those 
settlements, producers have announced increases in the wholesale price 
of cigarettes amounting to 25 cents a pack. But the national average 
retail price of a pack has remained at about $2. Ms. Zoller, the analyst, 
said that the prices being paid by smokers had not increased because 
cigarette makers were deeply discounting prices on the wholesale level 
and absorbing settlement costs as they battled for market share. She 
said that she expected the pattern of discounting to continue for 
a time if a new national settlement is reached. She said she believed 
that the Philip Morris Cos., the nation's largest cigarette maker, 
could absorb settlement costs longer than other producers because 
it was financially the strongest. Ms. Zoller said she believed that 
if the settlement's cost was passed along to consumers, cigarette 
use among smokers of all ages would fall 15 percent. Scott Williams, 
a spokesman for the tobacco industry, declined to comment on the settlement 
talks. Lawyers involved in the talks said that a final plan was not 
likely to emerge for at least 10 days and might be delayed further. 
The new proposal is intended to cover the 46 states that either had 
lawsuits pending against the industry or had not sued it. Along with 
Philip Morris, the tobacco companies involved are the R.J. Reynolds 
Tobacco, a unit of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.; Brown &AMP; Williamson 
Tobacco, a subsidiary of BAT Industries; Lorillard Tobacco, a subsidiary 
of the Loews Corp., and the smokeless tobacco producer U.S. Tobacco, 
a subsidiary of UST Inc. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>