<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0022 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Under the rules, Hank Morris is not allowed to say that the Senate 
race here is the campaign of a lifetime, the culmination of everything 
he has learned in politics, the potential breakthrough moment that 
could cement his reputation as a giant killer. Naturally, he does 
have other clients besides Charles Schumer, and it would be amateurish 
to stake one's reputation on a statistical dead heat, even if he is 
ahead by a few points. But under those same rules, no one has to believe 
him. In the words of his friend and former partner Phil Friedman, 
another Democratic media consultant, ``this race does mean everything'' 
to Morris. ``To defeat Al D'Amato with a candidate brought essentially 
from obscurity would be a professional triumph for Hank,'' Friedman 
said. ``Very few victories would ever mean more. And it would be a 
personal triumph as well, because it's a Long Island thing.'' Long 
Island, in this case, pronounced as if it were the Chinatown of the 
Roman Polanski movie, the den of sorrowful complications and primal 
political hatreds that has spawned the true passions behind the year's 
most virulent campaign. To see Morris in his full competitive glory, 
to understand why his advertisements for Schumer were constructed 
of such gleaming barbed wire, just get him started on growing up at 
a Democratic dinner table in Westbury on Long Island in the 1960s 
and '70s, in the heart of the Nassau Republican machine. ``It was 
supposed to be the idyllic suburban dream, but by the time you got 
to when I was coming of age, in the '70s, the machine had ruined it,'' 
said Morris, who is 45. ``There was rampant growth and a gas station 
on every corner and property taxes were choking people. You couldn't 
get a summer job if you were a Democrat _ they had done a leveraged 
buyout of Long Island.'' The diatribe builds to its inevitable crescendo 
as Morris _ fully agitated now, his words moving fast _ finally places 
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato at the controls of the machine, the apotheosis 
of everything he went into politics to eradicate. He stops short of 
saying it, but there is a great deal of the personal in this race, 
beyond his long friendship with Schumer, beyond the money he is making 
producing and placing the campaign ads, beyond the glory that he would 
obtain if his ads, which are the campaign, defeat D'Amato. ``The difference 
between me and most New Yorkers is that most people have come to believe 
D'Amato's been there too long,'' he said, ``while I believed he was 
in office too long before he ran for the Senate.'' Morris, in other 
words, has not moved into the first ranks of political consultants 
by being a dutiful technician, tailoring his ads to the whims of poll 
numbers. He has come to embody the New York style of political consultant: 
the gut-instinct competitor, spikes high, who comes to the game with 
plenty of ideology and a willingness to spend some time in the dirt. 
In 1993, when his client, Alan Hevesi, was waging his come-from-behind 
campaign against Elizabeth Holtzman for city comptroller, Morris was 
known to drop by Ms. Holtzman's news conferences to stare her down 
and fluster her. In 1990, his firm created an ad for Dianne Feinstein's 
gubernatorial race in California that became famous in political circles 
for using footage from the moment Ms. Feinstein told the world that 
the mayor of San Francisco had been assassinated. Though his competitors 
blasted the ad as tasteless, it was enormously effective and was credited 
with making her a statewide competitor. In the current race, Morris 
created the ads that call D'Amato a liar, matching the senator's anti-Schumer 
ads point by negative point. This has surprised no one who knows him, 
especially his detractors. ``He does too much negative,'' said David 
Garth, the legendary New York consultant who used to be Morris' mentor 
but hasn't spoken to him in the 16 years since he left Garth's firm. 
``He can win that way, but after a while American voters get tired 
of attack, attack.'' Morris, who can't even agree with Garth on the 
origins of their dispute, dismisses such talk, saying he is negative 
when necessary but is perfectly capable of running positive campaigns. 
It was the positive side of politics that first drew him into that 
world, he says, recalling his high-school volunteer work for Robert 
Kennedy and several local candidates. (His mother, who taught at Nassau 
County Community College, shared his interest, running an unsuccessful 
but colorful campaign for Congress in 1992. He says his best advice 
for her was not to run.) A year working in the state Assembly in 1975 
failed to horrify him, and in fact taught him a great deal about the 
pitiless nature of politics in his chosen neighborhood. After five 
years of working for Garth, he went out on his own in 1981, armed 
with a suitably quirky trademark (sweaters every day of the year) 
and his firm, now called Morris, Carrick &AMP; Guma, has steadily 
flourished. He lives by himself on the Upper West Side of Manhattan 
and spends almost every waking hour during a campaign on the phone. 
``Every time you do this, it seems like the most important thing in 
the world,'' he said. ``But I guess this one is a little bit special. 
Maybe the closest thing I've done to the Thrilla in Manila.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>