<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We stood at the edge of Wickford Harbor, blinking and sleepy, in baseball 
caps, bathing suits and old sneakers. It was 9:15 a.m., a reasonable 
hour for a workday, but early for four people on vacation who had 
never kayaked before, and were now face to face with a large body 
of water, two slips of boats shaped like bananas and a mellow guide 
named Craig. ``What happens if we tip over?'' asked my friend Lora. 
``These big double kayaks with rudders almost never tip,'' Craig responded 
casually. ``Only one guy's flipped all summer, and that's because 
he was too big for the boat.'' Somewhat reassured, we did our best 
to absorb Craig's 15 minutes of dry-land instruction, and gamely set 
out. Our kayak excursion was part of a larger quest to explore the 
western rim of Rhode Island's Narragansett Bay, particularly North 
Kingstown and its epicenter, Wickford Village, and Narragansett, farther 
down the coast, where the bay meets the ocean. We were all acquainted 
with Rhode Island's summer hot spots like Newport and Block Island, 
but wanted to get to know a lower-profile part of the state, whose 
genteel blend of cultivated fields, coastal marshes and big Shingle 
Style cottages especially beckons in early autumn. Known as Washington 
County on the maps, but South County to Rhode Islanders (call it anything 
else and you'll get blank stares), the western side of Narragansett 
Bay once harbored the northern equivalents of the grand plantations 
of the Old South. Without an urban nucleus like Providence to attract 
textile and other industries, South County clung to its rural ways 
from the 17th to the mid-19th century _ and to its slaves _ anchoring 
both on large farms with stone wall-studded fields that rolled down 
to the docks of the bay. The legacy of those days is open space and 
clean air, fresh vegetables and a handful of historic manor homes 
open to visitors. We planned to take in two of the latter, but had 
decided that the best place to begin our tour was on the bay itself, 
which is how we wound up at the Kayak Center in Wickford. The Kayak 
Center is ready to serve any man, woman, child or beast (they routinely 
stock life vests for dogs). I read in their brochure about full moon 
and stargazing trips, and even a 12-mile, open-ocean expedition to 
Block Island. My friends and I, however, had only two wishes: to see 
a bit more of Wickford Harbor than the yacht-lined basin visible from 
the village and to stay alive. Within 10 minutes it was pretty clear 
that we would accomplish both. Once Marguerite, my kayak companion, 
and I managed to synchronize the windmill motions of our paddles, 
we fell into an almost Zen-inducing rhythm that was one of the most 
peaceful (if shoulder-wearying) means of locomotion I've ever engaged 
in. Craig accompanied our two double kayaks in a smaller boat, and 
in two and a half hours introduced us to the oyster beds and sea grass 
meadows, the quietude of the otherwise lively harbor. Two islands 
in the middle, Rabbit and Cornelius, and a puckered shoreline full 
of coves and inlets, draped with the fog that drifted in on a thin 
breeze, made for a labyrinth of secret places watched over by last 
century's beach houses, a handful of fishermen and our kayak brigade. 
In the middle of our tour we beached on Rabbit Island for a quick 
snack of fruit juice and granola bars before heading back to shore 
past Poplar Point Lighthouse and channels of moored boats. I was crestfallen 
when we had to climb out of the kayaks; stepping back on land was 
like returning to work after a holiday. Immediately ahead, though, 
beckoned Wickford Village itself, essentially a single thoroughfare 
coming to a T-junction at either end, with enough shops and galleries 
and good food to compensate for breaking the morning's sea spell. 
Wickford is like Newport in miniature, shorn of tourist crowds. Despite 
some interesting shops like Wickford Antiques Center; Askham &AMP; 
Telham, stocked with elegant housewares, and the animal gift store 
Pet Peeves, Main Street is more residential than commercial. Herringbone-brick 
sidewalks lead past clapboard facades, beautifully restored and undulating 
with authentic age and Greek Revival porticos, to the bay. Also at 
the end of the street is a sturdy, 1745 Georgian with a waterfront 
deck and private beach, now the John Updike House Bed and Breakfast, 
which I had visited on a previous trip. Brown Street is the real hub 
of the place, brimming with shops both trendy and tasteful. A historical 
marker near the intersection of Brown and Main denotes the high-water 
line of the infamous 1938 hurricane (the force of the storm was such 
that pieces of South County homes were later found on Rhode Island's 
eastern shore). We came upon the marker on the way to Wickford Gourmet. 
Like the lair of some great, epicurean beast, it is packed with foodstuffs: 
olives in every reptilian shade of black and green, cheeses with rinds 
like topographical maps, hand-dipped truffles, pates, hot sauces, 
coffees, packaged goods stacked on shelves, hanging from the ceiling, 
pyramided on the floor. We'd opted to stay in Narragansett for the 
night, about 20 minutes' drive south along Route 1A (also called Boston 
Neck Road), but detoured into a bit of history. Just off the road 
is the Gilbert Stuart Museum, not exactly a manor house but a circa-1751 
snuff mill-cum-homestead next to a flower-ringed mill pond. It's about 
as picturesque as New England gets, although its collection includes 
none of Stuart's original paintings. We did learn, however, how to 
grind snuff, and that Stuart, who was born there in 1755, was a shrewd 
businessman _ whenever he was running short of money, he could knock 
off one of his famous George Washington portraits, based on the one 
that appears on the $1 bill, in two hours. He made a total of 120 
of them. We also learned that 18th-century shoes could be worn on 
either foot and that the expression ``off your rocker'' originated 
with a kind of rocking bench fitted with a safety bar for infants 
and a seat for a nanny; when the child cried the nanny was evidently 
off her rocker. It was a short drive to Narragansett Pier, as the 
town center is known, where we exchanged the 18th century for the 
turn of the 20th. In the late 1800s Narragansett rivaled Newport as 
a watering hole for wealthy vacationers. But while Newport attracted 
the glitterati, with a penchant for balls and imitation chateaux, 
Narragansett lured a less ostentatious set, content with seaside cottages, 
the inglenooks, verandas and turrets of which were amassed from the 
local vernacular into romantic piles of rock and shingle. This is 
not to say the Narragansett crowd wasn't above a casino of its own. 
In 1888, Stanford White completed one of his Shingle Style masterpieces 
on the edge of Narragansett Beach; it burned to the ground just 12 
years later, leaving only two stone towers linked by a floating arch. 
These remain today, straddling the coast road: two evocative, lichen-encrusted 
memorial markers of a long-dead building and the Gilded Age that commissioned 
it. We drove beneath the ruin, now known as the Towers, en route to 
Stone Lea Bed and Breakfast, another building designed by the legendary 
firm of McKim, Mead &AMP; White. Stone Lea sits with authority on 
an expansive lawn that is the only thing between the house and the 
Atlantic Ocean. The house, built in 1883-84, rises like an updraft 
of wood and fieldstone into a high, windswept gable, out of which 
sprout lighthearted conical dormers and eyebrow windows. The interior 
gleams with natural wood paneling and winding staircases. Enormous 
bay windows, generously fitted with curving window seats, survey the 
sea, while fireplaces and period furniture weave a comfortable spell 
of authentic, 19th-century ease. That night we drove 10 minutes to 
a venerable Rhode Island seafood spot called Aunt Carrie's for steamers 
and corn, and platters of fried shrimp, scallops, fish and clams. 
The next morning we headed back up to North Kingstown to visit Casey 
Farm. Like Smith's Castle, a 1678 manor house up the road also open 
to visitors, Casey Farm is a genuine northern corn and tobacco plantation. 
We chose to tour Casey Farm, built about 70 years after Smith's Castle, 
solely because of its good looks: The house is simply a large white 
clapboard box crowned by a seal-gray wood-shingled hip roof, the sides 
of which meet at a central peak topped by a chimney. Sitting squarely 
in open fields overlooking the bay, Casey Farm is a strip plantation 
that extends in a 300-acre swath from Narragansett Bay inland to the 
Narrow River. Our guide explained that walking paths led to both bodies 
of water, which we were welcome to follow after our abbreviated glimpse 
of the house (only one room is open to the public, as caretakers occupy 
the rest) and a tour of the surrounding fields. Casey Farm still produces 
vegetables for local townspeople, the fragrant evidence of which we 
found drying in the old corn crib: hundreds of bulbs of ivory-colored 
garlic, their delicate roots reminding me of clippings from sparse, 
curly beards. It was discomforting to learn that a year or so ago 
thieves in a helicopter had stolen Casey Farm's original weather vane 
(a reproduction now spins in its place) and, even more so, that there 
were once slave shackles in the basement. We eased our way back to 
Narragansett on Middlebridge Road, which follows the brackish and 
marsh-fringed Narrow River. At a serene, riverside spot, we found 
Narrow River Kayaks, another kayak outfit in a much quieter location, 
perfect for novices and those leery of the chop of Wickford Harbor. 
It is opposite Wiley's at Middlebridge, a tiny breakfast-and-lunch 
spot that has a casual serenity and the illusion that no one else 
on earth knows it exists. But we made our way back to Narragansett 
Pier to the ultra-cool Crazy Burger, half funky, half clapboard shack, 
for lunch. Crazy Burger is on Boon Street, which, a block to the south, 
becomes Gibson Avenue. This is the heart of Narragansett's Historic 
District and a haven of turn-of-the-century cottages, several of which 
have been converted into exquisite B&AMP;Bs. After a brief tour through 
the neighborhood, we opted to stroll along Scarborough Beach, less 
than a 10-minute drive south from Narragansett Pier's own town beach. 
On our last evening on the Western Shore, we chose to splurge at Woody's, 
a minuscule restaurant tucked into Pier Marketplace. The Marketplace 
represents an attempt to apply mid-century ideas about urban renewal 
to the seashore: essentially, it's a shingled mall opposite Narragansett 
Town Beach and a poor excuse for a village center. But it does harbor 
some good shops and restaurants, of which Woody's is a standout. For 
dessert we shared a rich, melting concoction of raspberries in warm 
mascarpone cheese that came in a kayak-shaped casserole: the perfect 
complement to our sea and land excursions along Narragansett Bay. 
Here is information about visiting the western shore of Narragansett 
Bay in Rhode Island: Attractions: CASEY FARM, 2325 Boston Neck Rd., 
North Kingstown, (401) 295-1030. An 18th-century plantation run by 
the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities. Open 
June through mid-October, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, 1 to 
5 p.m. Guided tours, $3; $2.50 for the elderly; $1.50 for children 
6 to 12; free for those under 6. GILBERT STUART MUSEUM, 815 Gilbert 
Stuart Rd., North Kingstown, (401) 294-3001. Working snuff mill, grist 
mill and 18th-century homestead that was the birthplace of Gilbert 
Stuart, who painted the portrait of George Washington used on the 
$1 bill. Open April through October, Thursdays through Mondays, 11 
a.m. to 4 p.m. Admission: $3; $1 for children 6 to 12; free for those 
under 6. SMITH'S CASTLE, 55 Richard Smith Dr., North Kingstown, (401) 
294-3521. Also known as Cocumscussoc, this fortified trading post 
of 1678 is one of the oldest plantation homes in the country, set 
on 27 square miles of coastal lands and gardens. From October through 
April, open by appointment only. Admission: $3; $2 for the elderly 
and students; $1 for children under 12; free for those under 4. THE 
KAYAK CENTER, 9 Phillips St., Waterside, Wickford, (401) 295-4400 
or (888) SEA-KAYAK. Kayak sales, rentals, instruction, group excursions 
and harbor tours, and a retail shop offering slick kayak stuff. Wickford 
Harbor tours for up to six people are held daily at 9:30 a.m. and 
1:30 p.m. in July and August, and on weekends in May, June, September 
and October. Cost: $40 per person in single or double kayaks; special 
rates for groups. NARROW RIVER KAYAKS, 95 Middlebridge Rd., Narragansett, 
(401) 789-0334. Kayak and canoe rentals, sales and tours on a tidal 
estuary that is ideal for birdwatching. Double kayak and sea kayak 
rentals are $12 an hour, $45 a day. Small Kiwi kayaks are $10 an hour, 
$34 a day. NARRAGANSETT TOWN BEACH and SCARBOROUGH BEACH, off Route 
1A in Narragansett. Both are long and flat with parking lots and full 
cabana service. Walk-on fee: $4 a person; parking: $5. Accommodations: 
THE RICHARDS, 144 Gibson Ave., Narragansett, (401) 789-7746. This 
gabled stone cottage built in 1884 is covered in ivy and secluded 
behind high trees and hedges; it looks like a modest English manor. 
Four guest rooms with working fireplaces, casual antiques and Oriental 
rugs evoke an atmosphere of gracious calm. The formal gardens are 
charming. Double rooms from $85 to $135, including full breakfast. 
JOHN UPDIKE HOUSE, 19 Pleasant St., Wickford, (401) 294-4905. A 1745 
home on a quiet side street along Wickford Harbor; two comfortable 
guest rooms each have fireplaces but share a bath and an adjoining 
common room. With continental breakfast, a double room costs $100 
for one night, $90 a night for longer stays. STONE LEA, 40 Newton 
Ave., Narragansett, (401) 783-9546. A magnificent McKim, Mead and 
White house converted into a four-room bed and breakfast. Wonderful 
atmosphere, though it was a disappointment that the owners could not 
accommodate an early-breakfast request. With full breakfast, double 
rooms cost from $125 to $175. Dining: AUNT CARRIE'S, 1240 Ocean Rd., 
Point Judith, Narragansett, (401) 783-7930. A classic seaside family 
restaurant with fried everything, steamers, lobster, Indian pudding 
and fresh fruit pies. Dinner for two costs around $30. Reopens early 
April. CRAZY BURGER, 144 Boon St., Narragansett, (401) 783-1810). 
A funky breakfast, lunch and dinner spot with offerings from breakfast 
crepes of poached pears in raspberry sauce with walnuts to wacky burgers 
to wood-grilled pizzas. Also an unusual selection of smoothies and 
milkshakes. Lunch for two costs around $20. WICKFORD GOURMET, 21 West 
Main St., Wickford, (401) 295-8190. A profoundly well-stocked food 
shop with a small cafe out back. Prepared specialties include pesto 
pizza, smoked bluefish pate and a big cheese board. Lunch for two 
costs about $17. WILEY'S AT MIDDLEBRIDGE, 95 Middlebridge Rd., Narragansett, 
(401) 782-3830. A tiny breakfast-and-lunch place that specializes 
in vegetable, salmon and beef burgers, fresh salads and Mexican dishes. 
B.Y.O.B. dinners are offered on Friday and Saturday nights, when the 
specials are always fresh fish. Breakfast for two costs from $7 to 
$10. WOODY'S, Pier Marketplace, Narragansett, (401) 789-9500. Imaginative 
``fusion'' cuisine in a tiny space. Dinner for four with wine and 
beer costs about $140. Shopping: ASKHAM &AMP; TELHAM, 12 Main St., 
Wickford, (401) 295-0891. A top quality housewares shop with a great 
selection of needlepoint pillows. PET PEEVES, 3 Main St., Wickford, 
(401) 295-5035. A gift store for pets, with items like Groucho Barks 
cigars for dogs. WICKFORD ANTIQUES CENTER, 16 Main St., Wickford, 
(401) 295-2966. A big space filled with small antiques and vintage 
clothing. Wickford Antiques Center II, around the corner at 93 Brown 
St., concentrates on furniture and artworks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>