<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0484 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The abandonment of nudity in fashion, no matter how fleeting it may 
be, has sent designers on a quest for other kinds of titillation. 
They have found it in new fabrics and in fresh ways of manipulating 
them. That is the course taken by Jil Sander and Miuccia Prada, two 
of the most provocative designers working today. They display an unending 
fascination with materials, changing their surfaces and draping and 
cutting them in ways that alter the proportions of the garments. Stefano 
Gabbana and Domenico Dolce, too, place an emphasis on the finish of 
fabrics, trying in many cases to make old ideas fresh again. What 
fashion has given up in favor of this focus on fabric is the flesh 
show that typified runway presentations in the early 1990s. Part of 
the catalyst for the drift into those easy jollies was the avalanche 
of interest in fashion from television. But most designers no longer 
feel the need to play to the camera. They have got used to seeing 
themselves and their work on E! Entertainment Television and VH1. 
And viewers have become ever more sophisticated about style. Even 
if they never buy a $600 nylon satchel, they can still rattle off 
the name Prada as easily as ``McDonald's.'' And so designers like 
Ms. Sander and Ms. Prada have won the freedom to turn their attention 
to design details that may not read on television, assured that there 
will nonetheless be a small-screen clamor to show what they put on 
the runway. ``The liberties of discipline'' is a phrase Ms. Sander 
used in her program notes. It describes aptly a lifetime of work that 
has brought her to the point where she is free to present avant-garde 
ideas, offer them at breathtaking prices and still make a sale. In 
the taut collection she presented Thursday, she seduced by invoking 
lightness, sensuality and playfulness, with her futuristic, imaginative 
brain in full view. She reminded her viewers what modern clothes mean 
now and what realistically they might mean in the future, creating 
garments that were light, bright and demanding in design but easy 
on the wearer. In black-and-white net Jacquards, she layered fabrics 
one upon another to give the illusion of three dimensions in sporty 
anoraks with hoods and careful, straight white trousers of pressed 
cotton. She cut an otherwise simple T-shirt with unfinished but precise 
hems and a thin flange of fabric running down either side. Geometric 
seams created a sunburst effect on the front of a sleeveless top. 
Often she showed languid skirts with pointed, asymmetric hems dipping 
a few inches in back. Suggesting luxury without the knee-jerk bells 
and whistles _ shiny accessories, lush fabrics and explosive colors 
_ is not easy. Ms. Sander pulled it off convincingly. While Ms. Sander's 
method is to be controlled and austere, Ms. Prada is far more frenzied, 
hitting viewers with startling ideas _ some good, others less so. 
Her use of smooth silver-blue paper fabric was interesting enough, 
but then she went further, sculpturing it into a feminine shirred 
slipover paired with a skirt enlivened with mirrors the size of compacts. 
The effect was not clownish. Instead, the skirts and leather coat 
that Ms. Prada ornamented this way were quite pleasing. It was a daring 
concept by an extreme designer, at a time when many others have been 
doing penny-size mirrors inspired by India. Romanced by origami, Ms. 
Prada decorated pleated skirts with vertical rows of looped fabric 
or box ruffles. She created a three-dimensional effect around hems 
with origami-like flowers set into cutouts. Hemp with a Jacquard finish 
was transformed into boxy jeanlike jackets and structured pleated 
skirts. Gauze, felted to appear rumpled and innocent, was cut into 
tunic tops and empire dresses, a few of which showed the breasts through 
a veil of fabric. If a dress can be a good luck charm, Ms. Prada created 
just such a look, placing mirrors and appliques of tiny origami-like 
folds of leather around the hips, or down the front, of gauze dresses 
and skirts. The effect resembled the many shiny and leather amulets 
worn by both Gypsies and traditional West African tribe members. One 
can never have too many defenses against evil spirits. The burning 
accessory question in fashion is where to put what used to be called 
the handbag. Bags, ubiquitous on Milan runways, are now turning up 
everywhere but in the hand. Ms. Prada put hers on models' backs, wrists, 
hips and ankles. At Trussardi, most were strapped high across the 
derriere. Trussardi's strength is its bags, but the house also makes 
the kind of flawless clothing one expects from Italian factories. 
Nicola Trussardi brought a refined tailoring to interesting techno-fabrics 
like neoprene, used in zippered, aerodynamic jackets and matching 
jams. The experimental fabrics are the right idea, but there's a note 
of the absurd in a collection full of foamy synthetic shorts and jackets. 
It's funny how synthetic fabrics have come to denote, simultaneously, 
both luxury and hipness. Rifat Ozbek, the Anglo-Turkish designer, 
used athletic-inspired mesh synthetics in many of the street-sweeping 
dresses and under-slips in his still-life presentation, an ode to 
New York street life. Ozbek, who has shown in New York for three seasons, 
said he decided to forgo a runway presentation this month to get ready 
for the earlier February show dates for fall 1999 in America. Before 
moving to New York, he had shown in Paris for several years. He was 
in Milan because his collection is manufactured here by Aeffe. Let 
there be no mistake about how luxurious Dolce &AMP; Gabbana's synthetic-looking 
fabrics are: wonderful laminated linens and laminated silks, glorious 
hand-painted silk, hologram fabrics and stretch Chantilly lace. Researching 
and developing fabrics for their steamy scenarios has become a magnificent 
obsession for these designers. But this was not a magnificent collection, 
though the house can claim bragging rights to several of the concepts. 
The too-hot-to-handle organza trousers, developed from the men's line 
shown by Dolce and Gabbana earlier this year, were a cool surprise. 
They came with back pockets like cargo pants, had a sexy fit through 
the back and flared near the ankles, which were adorned with zippers. 
A delectable combination was the red lacquered silk fitted sheath 
with a floral silk jacket ablaze with sequined striations that resembled 
the jagged relief of a computer printout. Tantalizing too were the 
micro-polos that ended under the bosom and the baby cardigans that 
did not extend even that far and were worn over a strapless dress 
or jumpsuit. But like weeds in a delightful garden, the seamless long 
jackets, lacquered black day or cocktail suits and transparent lace 
mermaid gowns that the models kept tripping over, even in their bare 
feet, were not up to the rest of the display. Laura Biagiotti is really 
too much a traditionalist and too firmly rooted in her ways to have 
much to do with newfangled fabrics. But quite by surprise, she put 
together a sweet show of airy, streetwise clothes, more youthful than 
anything she has produced in recent years. She owed it all to the 
sports influence she allowed into the line and to Ms. Prada, whose 
slashed skirts of last season were clearly a reference for the pristine 
white skirts and dresses with faggoting down the seams. Hooded shirts 
and jackets were whipped out in burnt yellow or sheer white voile 
with tangerine flocking. Scuba jackets in linen and day coats embroidered 
with green leaves topped pretty knee-brushing skirts, some delicately 
pleated and ballooned. It would stretch credulity to suggest that 
Ms. Biagiotti can claim ownership to any benchmark look of 1999, as 
implied by her runway history lesson tracing the evolution of fashion's 
silhouette from 1900 to the present. But she proved with this show 
that there's still some fight left in her. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>