<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I got into the cab at the airport and there they were _ 20-odd of 
my good friends. About 60 other people also were waiting in the cab. 
All were Americans of accomplishment, and all had signed a full-page 
ad in The New York Times against the impeachment of Bill Clinton. 
I read it as we rode through Queens. What struck me most about their 
statement was not the opposition to impeachment. That is shared by 
many Americans, not including me; we can argue that tomorrow, again. 
It was the great ``danger'' they presented _ a U.S. president twisting 
in the wind for months to come while the world was on the edge of 
war in the Balkans and the Mideast, international terrorism made war 
on America and the world economy was at risk. They said the ``power, 
authority and vigilance'' of the U.S. president must always be secure 
and evident, particularly now. I asked _ did you not realize that 
the deepest and continuing failure of President Clinton is precisely 
that he has not exercised power, authority and vigilance in international 
affairs, and shows neither the talent nor credibility to do so in 
whatever time is left to his presidency? Did you ask yourselves certain 
questions as your own test of his demonstration of presidential ``power, 
authority and vigilance''? About the Mideast, you are content, are 
you, that six years of Clinton policy have left Saddam Hussein a far 
more powerful leader and dreaded terrorist than when Bill Clinton 
became responsible for containing him? How does Clinton's ``authority 
and vigilance'' strike you as Saddam once again bars U.N. inspection, 
the only barrier to his production of nuclear, chemical and biological 
weapons? Does it bother you that the last time Saddam did that, the 
Clinton administration warned that just wait, next time you will really 
catch it _ and again does nothing? What believability would patched-up 
inspection have now, serving Iraq's pleasure? The Balkans: Can you 
explain what U.S. policy is? If so, could you tell U.S. diplomats, 
who have no idea? Well, to save Bosnian Muslims from slaughter by 
Bosnian Serbs armed by Serbia and its dictator. That is a good reason, 
but Bosnia could have been spared all bloodshed years ago. That is, 
if Clinton had insisted on the partition of Bosnia, seceding from 
Yugoslavia into Muslim, Serbian and Croatian areas. Instead he trotted 
along after Germany and other European nations trying to make a unified 
country that was and remains a mirage. U.S. planes blasted Bosnian 
Serbs into furious, temporary submission. Then Richard Holbrooke did 
the best anybody could to persuade the three parties to accept unity. 
But the nation of Croatia treats Bosnian Croatia as part of its territory. 
Once Clinton said no U.S. troops for Bosnia, no sir. Then he said 
U.S. troops for a year, then 18 months, then, oh, shut up, stop asking. 
He knew how to send them, not how to get them out of the foreign army 
assigned to keep the place from blowing up into another war. Now U.S. 
planes may attack Serbia to save the lives of ethnic Albanians in 
the Serbian state of Kosovo. Americans will agree to that. But again 
Clinton will not tell them how it will all end; no plan, ``authoritative'' 
or otherwise. Anti-proliferation: Clinton has continued and expanded 
the disastrous Reagan-Bush policy of allowing American and foreign 
businesses to help sharpen the aim and range of missiles for China, 
and so for Beijing's customer list, such as Syria and Iran. Years 
ago we used to say in New York that America sold Japan the scrap metal 
from the city's dismantled overhead train lines, but that at least 
Japan returned it all free, at Pearl Harbor. Clinton created a large, 
dangerous ineptitude in foreign policy. That reality is clearly understood 
by leaders all over the world _ particularly those who wish us evil. 
Perhaps it is one reason the U.S. military is edgy about more commitments. 
Over the top with Bill Clinton _ it does not have that certain ring. 
All this is no ground for impeachment. But it is no ground either 
for my friends in the cab to fear for American safety if Clinton is 
removed _ or summons up the honor to resign from the presidency he 
maimed through his own reckless instability. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>