<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Lear and his daughters make their entrance, they walk into a 
room whose walls are the color of dried blood. In Richard Eyre's stunning, 
minimalist production, the only furniture in that room is a long table 
and chairs, swathed in fabric of the same blood red. Fiery torches 
provide light, and the men wear medieval-looking tunics. Yet the women's 
long, high-collared dresses seem modern, even futuristic, and their 
hairstyles are conspicuously contemporary. Ordinarily it's a bad sign 
when someone begins by praising a play's scenery and costumes, but 
this Masterpiece Theater ``King Lear'' defies all expectations. Its 
visual look draws in the audience so effectively that the pared-down 
set becomes part of the ensemble. The hints at different chronological 
periods do not collide but blend together to give this ``Lear'' a 
timeless air, emphasizing that it is the most elemental of Shakespeare's 
plays. Sleekly trimmed to focus on the eternal themes of family love, 
betrayal and grief, the play has also been dazzlingly adapted for 
the camera by Eyre, based on his stage production at the Royal National 
Theater in London last year. At times the only backdrop is fog, as 
when the blinded, exiled Earl of Gloucester meets the madman he cannot 
recognize as his good son, Edgar. In one dreamlike, atypically elaborate 
scene late in the play, Cordelia, her army planning to rescue the 
father who has rejected her, is seen under a starry sky with rows 
of candles blazing before her, dressed in armor as if she were Joan 
of Arc. Meanwhile, the off-camera voice of a messenger describes her 
to the loyal Earl of Kent (``You have seen sunshine and rain at once 
_ her smiles and tears were like''). This is Shakespeare filtered 
through Beckett and Brecht, but it is far from a slick attempt to 
update the play. The result is a production of such freshness that 
it seems we are seeing the old story anew. A major preconception about 
this ``Lear'' should be tossed out at the start, though. Many critics 
praised Ian Holm's stage performance as one of the best Lears in memory, 
but it does not seem quite so towering here. Holm is never less than 
strong and intelligent (nothing to take for granted). Yet when he 
rails and rages at the elements, his solid, conventional Lear lacks 
the freshness to match that of the production. It does more justice 
to Holm to consider him as the crucial center, offering a precise, 
modulated performance that holds the play together even while Lear 
falls apart. Holm's interpretation highlights Lear's madness, and 
his flashes in and out of lucidity are the most poignant scenes. There 
is a hint of lunacy from the start, as he cackles while dividing his 
kingdom among his three daughters, foolishly demanding expressions 
of their love. This is a fierce Lear, and Victoria Hamilton's Cordelia 
has a fierceness to match, establishing a powerful link between them. 
In one questionable cut from the text, Eyre has eliminated Cordelia's 
asides explaining that she cannot express the depth of her emotions 
(``Love, and be silent''). But Ms. Hamilton creates a memorable Cordelia, 
both strong-willed and sensitive. When Lear moves to the homes of 
his snakelike daughters, Barbara Flynn as Goneril and Amanda Redman 
as Regan bring a suitably crisp, no-nonsense edge to their callous 
treatment of their father. Their houses duplicate the same stark set 
as in the opening scene, though the walls, like their clothes, are 
now black and gray, as if mirroring their bloodless hearts. With gray 
hair and beard, Lear's Fool (Michael Bryant) is visually his double 
here, expressing all the truths Lear is still unable to grasp. ``Thou 
shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise,'' the aged Fool 
says, and Lear responds with the line that is the soul of this interpretation: 
``O, let me not be mad.'' The parallel plot is just as sharply defined, 
with Timothy West as a strong, touching Gloucester. As his duplicitous 
bastard son, Edmund, Finbar Lynch is a weasely contemporary plotter, 
heard in voice-over as he describes his plan to turn Gloucester against 
his legitimate son, Edgar (Paul Rhys). Eyre's sparing yet effective 
use of voice-over smoothly adapts Shakespeare's explanatory passages 
for the screen. The scenes in which Lear howls against the elements 
on the heath have not been transformed with quite the same success. 
There is driving rain and wind, a stark black backdrop and brown earth. 
Yet the effect is too much like a stage production trying to represent 
a landscape, instead of the bold minimalism that so perfectly embodies 
the mood in this version's other scenes. When a defiant Lear yells 
``I am a man more sinned against than sinning,'' and rapidly tumbles 
into madness, it is easy to imagine that these episodes worked better 
in the theater. Holm got much attention for tearing off every stitch 
of clothing on stage; here there is a distant hint of nudity, suggesting 
that these scenes might not have been reworked for the screen enough. 
Like Holm's performance, this ``Lear'' is most eloquent in quieter 
moments. The camera closes in and captures the intimacy of Lear's 
excruciatingly sad, late recognition of how much he has misjudged. 
``Sir, do you know me?'' a weeping Cordelia asks the ragged old man 
the king has become. When Lear answers: ``I fear I am not in my perfect 
mind. Methinks I should know you,'' he displays his heartbreaking 
state, a loss so total he cannot count on love or even lucid thoughts. 
Whatever its small lapses, this is a magnificent ``Lear.'' PRODUCTION 
NOTES: MASTERPIECE THEATER `King Lear' PBS, Sunday at 9 (Channel 13 
in New York) A Chestermead Production for BBC-TV and WGBH/Boston. 
Richard Eyre, director; Sue Birtwistle, producer; Joy Spink, co-producer. 
Presented on PBS by WGBH/Boston. Rebecca Eaton, series executive producer; 
Russell Baker, host. WITH: Ian Holm (Lear), Victoria Hamilton (Cordelia), 
Barbara Flynn (Goneril), Amanda Redman (Regan), Michael Bryant (Fool), 
Finbar Lynch (Edmund), Paul Rhys (Edgar), Timothy West (Gloucester) 
and David Burke (Kent). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>