<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0274 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Spice and Poison waited patiently for the light as cars whizzed through 
the chaotic traffic circle below Brooklyn's Prospect Park. Spice was 
a smallish mare, but on her back I was nearly eye-level with the distant 
``Don't Walk'' sign. The light changed and Walker Blankinship, my 
instructor and the owner of Kensington Stables, moved Poison into 
the street. Spice lagged behind, and the light changed again before 
we were across. Blankinship called over his shoulder, ``Horses have 
right of way in New York City.'' As a longtime city driver, I was 
not reassured. I wanted Spice to hustle, but with my first riding 
lesson just under way, I didn't know how to tell her. I settled for 
meaningful eye contact with the closest driver, and we clip-clopped 
safely to the other side. In the 1800s, dozens of stables surrounded 
Prospect Park; Kensington Stables is the only one that remains. When 
I first entered the dimly lighted, crumbling brick barn, I eyed the 
wooden bars atop the stalls that were gnawed to half their original 
diameter and felt that I'd wandered into a Dickens novel. But a boombox 
wired crookedly to the side of a stall was playing a Haydn concerto, 
and the horses all looked glossy and well fed. Alone with 15 snorting, 
scuffling, thousand-pound nonhumans, I tried to act casual by patting 
the nose of a chestnut colt with a white blaze on his face. He turned 
his head sharply to look at me and I jumped a foot, just as Blankinship 
walked in. Bearded and spectacled, this 29-year-old Park Slope native 
is not your typical cowboy. After strenuously avoiding sports throughout 
childhood, he took up riding in college to learn more about horses 
for the medieval role-playing game ``Dungeons and Dragons.'' His knowledge 
is encyclopedic, encompassing both the practical and the esoteric. 
He and his family began running the stable in 1993 when the building 
was in danger of being sold and converted to a warehouse, which would 
have ended horseback riding in Prospect Park. To select the right 
horse for me, Blankinship asked about my riding experience. I had 
very little, even considering how large horses had always loomed in 
my imagination. Growing up in the Bronx, I devoured every horse book 
in the library and filled notebooks with horse drawings. At the age 
of 14 I went on my first trail ride. Plodding along a narrow path 
in a pack of riders, I tried to let my horse know I recognized its 
nobility and was worthy of its trust. It responded by stopping every 
few yards to graze, yanking the reins out of my hands. Recently, I 
resumed my quest for a soulful connection with a horse and decided 
to improve my chances by taking private lessons. I was nervous as 
I stood waiting in the street in front of the stables. When Spice 
sauntered down the ramp, I was struck by how big even a small horse 
looks when you haven't ridden one in 20 years. I had asked to ride 
Western style, so Spice was decked out in a big old easy chair of 
a saddle, curved up in the back with a horn in front I could grab 
if I had to. English-style riding, which uses a smaller, flatter saddle, 
seemed beyond my reach. In the movies, mounting a horse signals the 
beginning of a chase, a battle, a new life. I was determined to show 
some panache, or at least not get stuck halfway up. I stood on Spice's 
left side, grabbed the horn with my left hand, stuck my left foot 
in the stirrup and swung boldly up, making a mental note to wear looser 
jeans next time. Success! I stroked the horse's satiny neck, breathed 
in her clean, earthy scent, and my nervousness vanished. Blankinship 
turned his graceful, high-strung mare down Caton Street, and Spice 
obediently followed. Wearing a black velvet riding helmet in the rarified 
air eight feet above the ground, I felt regal. The stable is only 
a stone's throw over the traffic circle from the south entrance of 
the park. Once inside, we took the dirt bridal path to the riding 
ring. Blankinship used the 10-minute ride to deliver a lecture on 
horse psychology. Horses evolved to live in herds, he said authoritatively, 
and when you ask a horse to move about the world on its own you create 
a state of anxiety that can easily flare into panic. ``Your job as 
rider is to reassure your horse that nothing is about to eat it.'' 
Approaching the ring, Blankinship had me stand in the stirrups, bent 
forward at the hips, to warm up my calf muscles and practice keeping 
my legs against the horse's side. I did my best to avoid pitching 
forward onto Spice's neck. The ring was a lopsided circle of stout 
posts supporting a flimsy snow fence. I walked Spice around it (or 
did she walk me?) for the rest of the hour, practicing basic communication 
techniques. Squeeze the legs to move the horse forward. To turn left, 
tighten the left rein and squeeze with your left leg. To stop, pull 
back on both reins. But communication occurs on a far more subtle 
level as well. Blankinship said a horse ``listens'' to its rider's 
whole body. When I had trouble turning Spice, he told me to look where 
I wanted to go. ``When you move even just your eyes, you start a chain 
of physical adjustments that the horse picks up through its back.'' 
It worked. Spice moved immediately in the direction I looked. I now 
understood why some people say horses are dumber than dirt and others 
say they're smarter than Robert Redford. Horses may not have rational 
intelligence but their ability to read body language and mood is far 
more evolved than a human's. As we approached the traffic circle on 
the way back to the barn, Blankinship casually mentioned that if my 
horse spooked and ran, I should first breathe ``to communicate calm,'' 
then lean back and try to steer it in a circle or into brush to slow 
it down. ``Does this happen often?'' I asked, flashing back to the 
liability waiver I'd signed just after buckling my helmet. ``The national 
average is one incident per 350 riding hours,'' he said. He improves 
the odds by being selective about the horses he keeps, by putting 
customers on the right horses, and by keeping a low ratio of customers 
to guides. For the next couple of days I savored a slight stiffness 
in my thighs and the slight scent of Spice on my sweater. While the 
one-hour lesson could make only the slightest improvement in my technique, 
it had provided a compelling introduction to the intellectual and 
psychological challenges of riding. I arrived early for my next lesson 
and found the stable humming with horse lovers. A middle-aged man 
hanging out by the small corral across the street introduced himself 
as one of the Cobblestone Cowboys, a spirited band of four who board 
their horses at Kensington and regularly conduct mounted pub crawls 
in Brooklyn neighborhoods. Two pre-teen girls, both volunteers, were 
worshipfully grooming a couple of Shetland ponies tethered to a light 
pole. Inside the barn, another young volunteer called for help; Quasimodo 
would not go into his stall. Edwin Acety, a guide in his late 20's 
who has worked in the stable since he was 14, grabbed the horse's 
head and leaned his wiry shoulder into the animal, trying to muscle 
him backward. Blankinship introduced me to the rest of the horses, 
ranging in size from Midget, one of the Shetlands, to Hanover, the 
gigantic ex-carriage horse, reserved for the stable's largest customers. 
On a normal Saturday, the 12 ``hack horses'' make an average of three 
trips to the park for guided trail rides, usually in groups of two 
or three. The typical customer? Anybody and everybody. ``A lot of 
couples, sometimes a whole family,'' Blankinship said. I was now ready 
to try English-style riding, which Blankinship says is better for 
a beginner because the smaller saddle allows more contact and makes 
communicating with the horse easier. This time I rode a big sorrel 
mare named Katie, a former race horse. Halfway through the lesson, 
my clumsy seat and mixed-up signals began to try her patience, and 
every now and then she protested by stopping or grazing. ``Discipline 
her,'' Blankinship said sternly, and handed me a riding crop. A light 
tap on the haunch was enough to keep her moving. But I felt guilty, 
knowing that if I were a better rider the crop wouldn't be necessary. 
The highlight of the lesson _ and of my riding career to date _ came 
when Blankinship announced that it was time to post. One of the basic 
elements of horsemanship, posting involves rising up in the stirrups 
when the horse rises on the trot, staying up while she drops, and 
gently meeting the saddle as she rises again. Done properly _ leaning 
forward, hands low, with your lower leg back behind your knee and 
touching the horse _ you get a remarkably bounceless trot. I clicked 
into the rhythm only a small fraction of the time. But it's like what 
people say about golf: hit the ball cleanly once and you're hooked. 
One week later, I requested a ride around Prospect Park. We set off 
in a light rain that left the park pristine and empty. The air was 
as sweet as it ever gets in New York. The bridal path wound through 
parts of the 526-acre park I'd never seen before, at one point following 
a rocky stream through dense woods. Blankinship pointed out dozens 
of features in the landscape that in his opinion at least proved the 
genius of Frederick Law Olmstead and Calvert Vaux, the park's designers. 
As I listened to stories about Revolutionary War battles and park 
restoration campaigns, I stopped thinking about my technique; toward 
the end of the ride I realized Katie and I were communicating without 
conscious effort on my part. When I wanted to go left, she went left. 
I could tell when she was thinking about stopping for a mouthful of 
grass, and I could tactfully move her ahead without using the crop. 
I had a sense of a partnership beginning. The reality of riding was 
different from the dream: less romantic, but far more interesting. 
HORSES FOR HIRE c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service There are a handful 
of stables in New York City. For a guided trail ride, you just show 
up, wearing comfortable pants and leather shoes or boots. No riding 
experience is necessary, but if you are a beginner tell your guide. 
Lessons require a phone call to arrange. Here is a sampling of stables. 
Brooklyn KENSINGTON STABLES, 51 Caton Place, off Ocean Avenue, Kensington, 
(718) 972-4588). Open 10 a.m. to sunset, seven days a week. Trail 
rides in Prospect Park are $20 an hour. Private lessons are $40 an 
hour, by appointment. Queens JAMAICA BAY RIDING ACADEMY, 7000 Shore 
Parkway (off the Belt Parkway, between exits 11 and 13), Jamaica Bay, 
(718) 531-8949. Open 9 a.m. to 8 p.m., seven days a week. Trail rides 
on the beach and wooded trails are $19 for 50 minutes; individual 
riders can rent horses for $35 an hour. Private lessons are $50 an 
hour; group lessons, $40. The Bronx PELHAM BIT STABLES, 9 Shore Road, 
Pelham Bay Park, (718) 885-0551. Open 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., seven days 
a week. Trail rides in Pelham Bay Park are $20 an hour. Private lessons 
are $35 a half-hour, by appointment. Manhattan CLAREMONT RIDING ACADEMY, 
175 W. 89th St., (212) 724-5100. Open 6:30 a.m. to 10 p.m. weekdays, 
6:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. weekends. Group and private lessons for all levels. 
Private lessons are $40 for a half-hour, by appointment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>