<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0488 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The battering of the financial markets left few money managers unscathed 
in the third quarter. Just ask the ones whose hypothetical retirement 
portfolios have been tracked by The New York Times for the last five 
years. All five managers lost money, and they clearly were not alone: 
Only 150 of the 6,616 stock funds followed by Lipper Analytical Services, 
in Summit, N.J., had positive returns for the three months; on average, 
stock funds lost 14.82 percent. (Bond funds fared much better, with 
domestic long-term bond funds returning an average of 1.36 percent 
through Sept. 30, Lipper said. But fund portfolios for long-term goals 
like retirement are generally built on equities, which historically 
have returned more over time than bonds.) For the five managers, the 
losses ranged from 9.86 percent for the ``socially responsible'' portfolio 
built by Jack A. Brill, a San Diego investment adviser, to 15.91 percent 
for Sheldon Jacobs, who edits The No-Load Fund Investor in Irvington, 
N.Y. Still, Jacobs remains in first place over all, with a cumulative 
return of 92.91 percent from July 7, 1993, when the contest began. 
(Brill is closing in, however, with a cumulative gain of 89.66 percent.) 
In the third quarter, Brill was helped by his small holdings in bonds 
_ in the Vanguard GNMA fund, up nearly 3 percent, and Pax World, which 
lost just over 2 percent. But that doesn't stop him from keeping a 
stock-heavy portfolio. ``I still continue to think that over the long-term 
a retirement portfolio should have an asset allocation of 85 percent 
stocks and 15 percent bonds,'' he said, even though he does not expect 
market volatility to end soon. ``The market is still in for a very 
rough time over the next three to six months,'' he said. ``It will 
probably continue these up-and-down bounces and generally move without 
much upward direction.'' He is making just one change, adding Bridgeway 
Social Responsibility, a three-year-old large-cap blend fund that 
has outperformed the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index over the 
last year, and dropping Delaware Social Awareness, which returned 
just 2.9 percent in the last year and was down nearly 16 percent in 
the third quarter. The rough quarter provided a vindication of sorts 
for Harold Evensky, an investment adviser in Coral Gables, Fla. Evensky 
lagged behind the other advisers in the last quarter because his portfolio 
was not as concentrated as the others in large domestic stocks, the 
best performers until recently. With the collapse of those stocks 
in the third quarter, his portfolio took second place, despite its 
loss of 12.71 percent. ``Hallelujah! The benefit of diversification 
is finally showing its sweet little head,'' Evensky said. ``Not much, 
but it's a start.'' He is making no changes in his portfolio. One 
of his holdings, Barr Rosenberg Market Neutral, rose 1.8 percent. 
It was among just 3 of the 43 funds held by the advisers that made 
money in the quarter. (The other two were bond funds.) The fund aims 
to neutralize market volatility through a mix of long and short sales. 
In the long run, the five hypothetical portfolios continued to lag 
behind the popular Vanguard Index Trust 500, a portfolio designed 
to mimic the performance of the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index. 
The Index 500 has returned 157.2 percent since the contest began, 
compared with an average of just over 79 percent for the five advisers. 
And only Brill beat the Index 500 in the quarter; his loss of 9.86 
percent was slightly better than its decline of 9.9 percent. The performance 
of the five portfolios is tracked each quarter by Lipper Analytical. 
It excludes sales charges, transaction costs and taxes because most 
retirement money is held in tax-deferred accounts. The five managers 
can choose any fund open to new investors. From the outset, they were 
asked to pick portfolios that would grow for 20 years. Susan Dziubinski, 
editor of Morningstar Fund Investor, finished in third place for the 
quarter, with a loss of 15.55 percent. Her heavy portfolio holdings 
in value stocks, which tend to hold up better during market corrections, 
did not protect her during the third quarter, when the stocks with 
the highest price-to-earnings ratios were not necessarily hurt the 
most. Value funds, particularly the smaller ones, were hard-hit. So 
she is adding a growth fund _ T. Rowe Price Mid-Cap Growth _ to offset 
her portfolio's value bias. The manager of the fund ``likes growth,'' 
she said, ``but he won't pay ridiculous prices for it.'' To add that 
fund, Ms. Dziubinski is shaving her holdings in Third Avenue Value 
Small Cap and Ivy International. Eric M. Kobren, president of the 
Kobren Insight Group in Wellesley, Mass., who finished fourth in the 
quarter, uses only Fidelity funds in his portfolio. He is concerned, 
he said, about a slowing economy and increasing volatility in the 
stock market. As a result, he is doubling his position in a bond fund, 
Fidelity Spartan Government Income, to 20 percent of the portfolio. 
He is reducing his positions in Fidelity International Value and Fidelity 
Capital Appreciation. In last place for the quarter, Jacobs is making 
several changes to his portfolio. He is dropping the Mutual Discovery 
fund for several reasons: poor performance (it lost more than 19 percent 
in the quarter); the announcement by the manager, Michael Price, that 
he was leaving, and the fund's doubling in size over the last two 
years. Jacobs is also dropping Hotchkis &AMP; Wiley Small Cap, which 
lost nearly 27 percent in the quarter. ``I think small caps will continue 
to lag large caps the balance of the year because there will be greater 
tax-loss selling among small caps,'' he said. He is adding to his 
positions in Marsico Focus, bringing it to 15 percent, from 10 percent, 
and Vanguard Total Stock Market, to 35 percent from 32.5 percent. 
And he is creating a 12.5 percent position in the Vanguard Index Trust 
500. ``This gives my portfolio increased representation in the large-cap 
area,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>