<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0480 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What is wrong with Coach George? At the very time the New York Yankees 
needed a football-style, two-a-day drill on the fine art of throwing 
the baseball to first base, Coach George was fighting a grudge match 
with the baseball establishment. Make no mistake about who is to blame 
for the Yankees' being in trouble. Their fielders committed a triple 
play of blunders in their perhaps-soon-to-be-legendary loss Wednesday 
to the Cleveland Indians. The fault is in the Yankees' execution rather 
than the umpires or the rules or the runner _ or even ``Dr. Gene Budig,'' 
as Coach George calls him, as if there is something suspicious about 
the American League president's holding a doctorate. There are a lot 
of things wrong with the major-league umpires: their strike zones 
are puffed up out of proportion, and so are their attitudes. But the 
umps did not put the Yankees in this dumbfounding position of actually 
having lost a game in the postseason. In the bad old days, if the 
Yankees had botched a vital play to lose a game, Coach George would 
have had them out sweating in Cleveland on Thursday, working on one 
simple play: throwing the runner out at first base. The players could 
have taken turns running down the base line while the pitchers, catchers, 
first basemen and second baseman worked on their basics. I've watched 
the replay a few dozen times and come to the conclusion that Tino 
Martinez was wrong in plugging the Indians' Travis Fryman between 
the shoulder blades and that Chuck Knoblauch was equally at fault 
for not giving Martinez a target on the infield side of first base. 
Once the ball bounced off Fryman, Knoblauch lost his composure and 
argued with the umpire rather than chasing the ball. He maturely admitted 
his mental error Thursday, but still, that was only the third mistake. 
The Yankees argued that Fryman had run on the fair side of the base 
line and should have been ruled out for interference, but the crew 
chief of the umpires, Jim Evans, insisted, ``There is nothing illegal 
about going around the pitcher's mound in your route to first base.'' 
I like the concept of a runner's gamboling around the greensward, 
making a leisurely route toward first base. But Evans' point is well 
taken (at least by me). ``In this case, the problem happened right 
at the base,'' Evans said. ``It happened on the base. So that is what 
the plate umpire, Ted Hendry, based his ruling on, the fact that he 
has a right to be in fair territory at the base. Again, if a throw 
is on the second base side of the base and not right at the base, 
it doesn't hit him, they probably retire him or it is a bang, bang 
play.'' Fryman deserves credit for making an excellent bunt (only 
the second time all year he had been asked to bunt), forcing Martinez 
to hurry his throw, while Knoblauch ran to cover, expecting to catch 
the ball right over first base. This is wrong. Every team sport has 
the concept of putting the ball (or puck) where a teammate will be. 
Martinez should have thrown the ball to the left of the runner's back, 
on the fair side of first base. Given the accuracy of players' arms, 
it is reasonable to expect Knoblauch to have been able to give a target 
and catch a ball streaking past the runner. The Yankees should have 
run that play 1,000 times in spring training, the same way that pitchers 
practice covering first base on the first day they report _ a good 
play to sweat out all the poisons accumulated in the body and the 
mind from sitting in front of the tube all winter. It worries me that 
Coach George concentrated on lambasting ``Dr. Gene Budig,'' given 
George's traditional fixation with his brief career as an assistant 
college coach. Bill Parcells, now there's a real football guy for 
you. The affable coach of the New York Jets would have kicked the 
Yankees in their sore spots Thursday, and then ordered them to practice 
the throw to first base until they whimpered for mercy. Coach George 
can rant all he wants about needing one set of umpires rather than 
having the two leagues with different ways of perching behind the 
catcher, two sets of interpretations of rules, two enlarged strike 
zones. In that, Coach George is absolutely right. I'm sure the new 
commissioner will get right on this. However, rather than punish and 
bully his players, Coach George dickered and dithered about even holding 
a workout on the off day, which was mandated by league laws. This 
only tells me he really is going to sell the Yankees to some other 
guy from Cleveland like Charles Dolan of Cablevision. Coach George 
is going soft. Never thought I'd see the day. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>