<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0383 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Energy Department's official forecasting arm has produced an extraordinarily 
pessimistic forecast of steeply rising energy prices if the United 
States fights global warming by clamping down on emissions of heat-trapping 
gases that come from burning fossil fuels. Under various outcomes, 
the forecasting arm, the Energy Information Administration, projected 
gasoline prices would rise to between $1.39 and $1.91 a gallon, and 
electricity prices would rise 20 percent to 86 percent by 2010. Natural 
gas prices would rise significantly and coal prices would soar, the 
forecast said. Under an international agreement negotiated last year 
in Kyoto, Japan, the United States would have to reduce emissions 
of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases significantly in 10 to 
15 years. But the treaty is in trouble in Congress, where opponents 
often say it would wreck the economy. The Energy Department's forecast 
is sharply at odds with the Clinton administration's previous assertions 
that the United States can meet the targets set by the treaty without 
significant economic disruption. The forecast is to be presented Friday 
at a congressional hearing. The new study plays directly into the 
hands of treaty opponents, but those who favor the treaty said the 
study is deeply flawed. Energy conservation advocates said the forecast, 
produced using the Energy Information Administration's standard economic 
models, had relied on absurd assumptions and improper analysis to 
reach ridiculous conclusions. ``This is one of the most flawed, biased, 
intellectually dishonest analyses ever produced by an supposedly unbiased 
analytical organization,'' said Joseph Romm, a former assistant secretary 
of energy. Romm is an expert on energy technologies like solar power 
and conservation that would help control greenhouse gas emissions. 
He and other critics said the study discounted many of the policies, 
like tax incentives and research subsidies, that the administration 
had proposed for enforcing the treaty if the Senate approved it. They 
said it used computer models that were unreliable for long-term forecasting. 
They said it did not account for the lower costs that would result 
from a key feature of the administration's climate change policy: 
international emissions trading, which would allow the United States 
to meet the treaty's targets largely by paying other countries to 
reduce their output of greenhouse gases. Critics also said the forecast 
assumed that businesses would be slow to adopt new energy technologies 
although, under the forecast's own projections, the costs of not acting 
would be high. Many such computer models have been used for projecting 
the costs of the Kyoto agreement protocol on climate change. Because 
so much depends on the assumptions of the models, their predictions 
may not be reliable. And critics noted that the Energy Department 
had a long track record of making bad predictions about long-range 
trends in energy prices and pollution control costs. Even so, the 
new study is certain to fuel criticism of the treaty. The study is 
scheduled to be presented Friday at a hearing of the House Science 
Committee, whose chairman, Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., is a 
leading critic of the climate change treaty. The study's projections 
of the costs of controlling the emissions of greenhouse gases are 
significantly greater than the predictions of several similar studies, 
even the gloomy forecasts paid for by industry opponents of the treaty 
that predicted extraordinary costs. And it predicts that the costs 
would be much higher than predicted by Dr. Janet Yellen, chairwoman 
of the Council of Economic Advisers, in a study released in July. 
Eileen Claussen, a former senior State Department official who helped 
negotiate the Kyoto agreement, said that just as Dr. Yellen's analysis 
was wildly optimistic, this one was wildly pessimistic. ``Both of 
these forecasts are totally unrealistic,'' Ms. Claussen said. ``It 
is the most bizarre thing. They haven't put out a single bit of analytical 
work on the costs that has any credibility at all.'' Ms. Claussen 
now directs the Pew Center on Climate Change, which has drawn together 
major corporations pledging early actions to cut their emissions of 
greenhouse gases. Romm, who now consults with businesses on how to 
cut greenhouse gas emissions, criticized the report's assertions that 
emerging technologies like solar power and fuel cells would gain little 
over 20 years although costs of traditional fuels were likely to rise. 
He ridiculed the study's finding that even with coal prices soaring, 
power plants would not install any measurable cogeneration equipment, 
which uses waste heat to generate extra electricity from coal. Although 
the new study predicts slowing economic growth as a result of higher 
energy costs, over the long run this amounts to just tens of billions 
of dollars in an economy that grows to more than $10 trillion. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>