<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0219 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All human evil, the French philosopher Blaise Pascal said in ``Pensees,'' 
comes from ``man's being unable to sit still in a room.'' That interesting 
statement is one of many you could find to illustrate the philosophical 
futility involved in trying to change one's destiny by changing one's 
address _ especially by changing it to some locale of special beauty 
and exotica. In her entertaining, intensely romantic first novel, 
``Rules of the Wild,'' Francesca Marciano presents a young woman from 
Italy who tries to do just that, and, as Pascal might have predicted, 
finds a certain ecstasy but a good deal more misery. The woman, who 
is also Ms. Marciano's narrator, is Esmeralda, who grew up in New 
York and Rome. When her remote and ardent father, Ferdinando, a poet 
of international reputation, dies, Esme, as she is called, becomes 
an orphan. She goes off to Kenya with a boyfriend in search of something 
strange and therefore something more intensely felt, or, as she puts 
it, something that will force you ``to experience the euphoric horror 
of floating in emptiness, your moorings cut for good.'' Esme stays 
in Africa, becoming a typical Nairobi expatriate who has nothing to 
do with Africans. She lives on cappuccino, cocaine and gossip with 
her friends, and she spends more money in an afternoon of shopping 
than her servants make in a month. She also falls in love with two 
virile white men who seem stand-ins for characters that Hemingway 
might have created, one an adventurous war correspondent and the other 
a game guide for tourists. Caught between two lovers, neither of whom 
satisfies her spiritual longings, Esme struggles with the curse and 
the beauty of African exile. Throughout this novel, Ms. Marciano, 
described on the dust jacket as a documentary filmmaker who divides 
her time between Rome and Kenya, skirts the abyss of self-indulgence. 
Esme, smart and poetic as she is, has the bad habit of confounding 
the philosophical quandary of voluntary exile with the psychic inadequacy 
of bourgeois life. She is a sensualist who denies herself nothing 
and experiences deep anguish when she fails to have what she wants. 
But at the same time, she is far too intelligent, too good an observer 
of herself and her scene, for her world-weariness to become a pose. 
``We have servants, we don't pay taxes, we go to lots of dinner parties, 
we play explorers over the weekend, we look healthy and tanned all 
year round and we can always blame it on the Africans when things 
are not running smoothly,'' Esme's best female friend in Nairobi says. 
``It's such a bargain!'' One suspects that there is something more 
than casually autobiographical in Esme's reflections on being white 
in Africa. Ms. Marciano artfully and graphically captures the bittersweet 
quality, the undertone of smugness that often saturates expatriate 
life, in Africa or any other place where Europeans and Americans congregate 
in search of the Great Elsewhere. Ms. Marciano's scenes of everyday 
life are etched in subtle colors. ``Let's be honest about it,'' Esme 
tells us near the beginning of her tale. ``This is a story about white 
people in Africa.'' The characters are believable precisely because 
one can't believe in them. They are too conscious of being white people 
in Africa, and too defensively, cattily contemptuous of white people 
who are not. Esme is one of the most compellingly self-absorbed European 
women to be portrayed in Africa since Greta Scacchi played the decadent 
Diana Broughton in ``White Mischief'' a decade ago. She is more earnest 
than Broughton, and devoid of illusions, in control of her mind but 
not her furious sentiments. She is capable of something close to meltdown 
in confrontations with men, and she suffers her setbacks with a full 
heart and just a touch of acidulous self-deprecation, a sexy Roseanne 
Arnold of the savanna. We meet Esme on a masochistic expedition to 
pick up Claire, a pretty blond woman arriving from London to live 
with her boyfriend, one of the men Esme loves. Leaving the airport, 
Esme quickly puts us into the expat scene in Nairobi as she and her 
friend Nicole snort coke, smoke cigarettes and shop. (A telling detail: 
Esme removes the price tags from her new espresso cups so her servants 
won't see how much they cost.) The rest of ``Rules of the Wild'' is 
mostly flashback, beginning with Esme's arrival in Africa years before 
in the company of an Italian boyfriend she quickly dumps in favor 
of Adam, the big-game guide who persuades her to settle in Kenya. 
``I had never thought of myself as a good person,'' she says. ``Too 
twisted, too unhappy to be good. But now I wanted to be tamed. I needed 
to revive my integrity. I knew I could be a better person than the 
one I had been lately.'' It is not clear that Esme becomes a better 
person, but she does learn something from a stormy life in the irritable 
precincts of white Africa. Esme's lovers, Adam and Hunter, are amply 
realized figures. Hunter, who conquers Esme's heart even as Adam wins 
her mind, is a swashbuckling skeptic, a foreign correspondent for 
an British newspaper who disappears for long stretches to cover the 
genocide in Rwanda. Esme's tortuous pathway between them is chronicled 
by Ms. Marciano with a closeness and a perceptiveness worthy of Flaubert. 
Her novel, about a woman greedy for love and beauty and fully aware 
of that greed, is a charged, emotionally potent, engaging literary 
debut. PUBLICATION NOTES: RULES OF THE WILD By Francesca Marciano 
292 pages. Pantheon. $23. By RICHARD BERNSTEIN 
</TEXT>
</DOC>