<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981008.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As financial gloom grew across Europe Thursday, political leaders 
were running into deepening conflicts with European central banks 
over the best way to respond. With less than three months before 11 
countries adopt the euro as a new European currency, the bankers who 
govern the new European Central Bank are holding to a conservative 
policy designed to establish the euro's credibility. But political 
leaders, particularly in Germany and France, have begun bluntly attacking 
those policies and are pushing for easier money as a way to spur economic 
growth and jobs. The dispute has intensified in the last few days 
after the Social Democratic Party's victory in German elections on 
Sept. 27. While the U.S. Federal Reserve has begun to cut rates, many 
of Europe's politically independent bankers have been reluctant to 
follow suit, and politicians are beginning to complain. ``I find it 
wrong that the Bundesbank conducts its monetary policy as if these 
problematic developments in global finance weren't there,'' said Oskar 
Lafontaine, the chairman of the Social Democratic Party who is expected 
to be named finance minister in the new German government. ``It's 
not a holy institution with a doctrine of papal infallibility.'' For 
the moment, most central bankers are refusing to bend. European currencies 
have surged against the dollar in recent days after Hans Tietmeyer, 
the president of Germany's central bank, the Bundesbank, made it clear 
on Wednesday that he would not cut rates in the near future. But the 
pressure is increasing. European stock markets plunged Thursday, largely 
on expectations that stronger European currencies hurt exports and 
slow growth. In Germany, Europe's biggest economy and heaviest exporter, 
the benchmark DAX index plunged 4.98 percent. In another sign of pressure, 
the Bank of England announced Thursday that it would cut a key short-term 
interest rate by a quarter-point, to 7.25 percent. For Britain, which 
has decided not to join the European currency union and follows a 
separate monetary policy, it was the first rate cut since June 1996. 
In continental Europe, leaders are battling over fundamental economic 
policy. With the Social Democrats' victory, Europe's biggest countries 
are or will soon be controlled by center-left governments. A growing 
number of those governments now favor an easier monetary policy and 
would like to exert more political control over the European Central 
Bank. In Germany, Lafontaine has been an adamant critic of hawkish 
monetary policies. Representing the Social Democrats' orthodox left 
wing, he has argued for years that such policies were the biggest 
culprits behind the nation's high unemployment. French political leaders 
share those views. Socialist Prime Minister Lionel Jospin has long 
advocated lower interest rates to spur job creation. He has also bristled 
at the political independence given to the Bank of France and the 
new European Central Bank, calling for stronger political controls. 
All of that runs counter to core principles of the European Central 
Bank and of individual national banks. Because the euro will have 
its debut in January, the central banks of each member country have 
already locked their policies together into what amounts to a single 
framework. By law, the new European Central Bank is allowed only to 
focus on the question of price stability and inflation. Government 
leaders are not allowed to interfere or to influence any of its decisions. 
``What we are seeing is indeed very significant,'' said Thomas Mayer, 
an economist at Goldman, Sachs in Frankfurt. ``We aren't used to having 
a government trying to influence monetary policy. In the strategy 
of the new German government, the role of monetary policy is obviously 
to spur economic growth and the creation of jobs. That is obviously 
an approach that the central bankers of the European Central Bank 
do not share.'' Many economists argue that Europe is already following 
an expansionary monetary policy and does not need to change course. 
Germany's basic short-term rate is 3.3 percent, and the average rate 
across the 11 countries in the ``euro zone'' is 3.7 percent _ significantly 
lower than in the United States, where rates are more than 5 percent. 
Indeed, Tietmeyer and many private sector economists argue that Europe 
is already loosening monetary policy as it prepares for the euro. 
That is because countries with traditionally high interest rates, 
like Spain and Italy, have to align their rates with those of Germany 
and France before the debut of the euro. Until recently, most economists 
assumed that Germany would help close the gap by nudging its rates 
upward. Instead, the central bankers appear determined to keep their 
rates low and let the other countries drop down to their level. Spain 
took just such a step this week, cutting its short-term rate by a 
half-point, to 3.75 percent. Portugal, Italy and Ireland are expected 
to follow suit. Despite the global financial turbulence, Dresdner 
Bank and many other institutions still predict that European economic 
growth will remain well above 2 percent next year and will exceed 
that of the United States. That is because the United States is likely 
to be more affected by a slowdown in Latin America. ``The central 
bankers are confident that monetary policy in euroland is expansionary 
at the moment and will remain expansionary,'' said Stefan Bergheim, 
an economist at Merrill Lynch in Frankfurt. ``We don't need to be 
lectured by central bankers who are running interest rates that are 
20 percent higher than ours.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>