<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981008.2000.1260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, today was opening day of the 1998 Nobel season. The first honoree 
to win one of the $985,000 prizes was named this morning. He's Jose 
Saramargo of Portugal, winner of the Nobel Prize for literature. Awards 
for medicine, physics, and chemistry, economics, and peace will be 
announced next week. But you won't have to wait that long to learn 
the winners of the Ignobels Prizes. They get their just desserts tonight 
across the river in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The Ignobels honor achievements 
that in the words of organizer Mark Abrams cannot or should not be 
reproduced. That's all we ever say about it. We allow the listener, 
reader, spectator, whatever, to make any decisions as to whether something 
is good or bad. And, in fact, every year, about half of the winners 
have done things that are whimsical and pretty wonderful. The other 
half have done things that are maybe not very whimsical and perhaps 
not at all wonderful. And yet, I would bet they all have a certain 
very deep human appeal, don't they? Yes, to at least one human being 
somewhere. Some of them really are terrific things. And about half 
of the winners, this year more than half either are coming to the 
ceremony or will have representatives. Part of the reason for that 
is we get a bunch of Nobel Laureates, real Nobel Prize winners there 
to hand the Ignobel Prizes to the Ignobel Prize winners. It's kind 
of a magical moment. It's like watching two opposite ends of the universe 
touch and stare at each other in wonder. What else are you doing at 
the ceremony this evening? I notice you've got quite a few people 
showing up. Our theme this year is duct tape, so we'll have all kinds 
of tributes to duct tape. There's a duct tape fashion show. There's 
an opera, "La Forta Del Duct Tape," for sopranos, baritones, and Nobel 
laureates. We'll have our annual win-a-date-with-a-Nobel-laureate 
contest. Oh, and who's to be the... The prize is Richard Roberts, 
who... Richard Roberts. He's Nobel Prize? 1993 Nobel Prize in physiology 
or medicine. What else do we have? We have a couple of really good 
keynote speakers. One of them is Emily Rosa, who's the 11-year-old 
girl from Colorado who earlier this year became the youngest person 
ever to publish a scientific research paper. She debunked the theory 
behind something called therapeutic touch, which is taught in a lot 
of nursing schools. It's a theory that nurses can heal people by waving 
their hands at them. And our other keynote speaker is Troy Herdebes, 
who's coming down from North Bay, Ontario. Troy has spent the last 
decade designing building and testing huge high tech suit of armor 
that he can wear so he can go out and spend time along with grizzly 
bears in the woods. Tell me something about some of the awards that 
you've given out in the past. Give me some of the topics and the... 
There's been a great range. Don Featherstone, the inventor of the 
plastic pink flamingo won a prize several years ago. In fact, he'll 
be back tonight modeling duct tape fashion. There's a wonderful public 
health prize a couple of years ago went to a Norwegian doctor for 
an unusual case report he had published entitled "Transmission of 
Gonorrhea Through an Inflatable Doll." I don't think I want to pursue 
that one. Well, you know, it's a matter of good health. And he was 
so pleased to win the prize that he paid his way to fly himself from 
Oslo, Norway to Cambridge, Massachusetts to collect the prize. And 
then he passed on some advice, which I'm sorry, but you really do 
need to know this. He said that when you date an inflatable doll, 
you should remember that you're dating everyone that who ever dated 
that inflatable doll. Any interesting candidates from other parts 
of the world for this year? Yeah, the winners - I'm sorry I can't 
reveal the names until tonight, but we have winners from several countries, 
from, let's see, India, France, Canada. Canada will have two winners 
this year. The United States, where else? Several other nations. Oh, 
Southern California. Mark, I'm wondering, you're in a position to 
see a lot of trends happening in science. Are you seeing new ideas 
coming out of the technologies? Yeah, there are lots of interesting 
things being done, and a lot of the prizes we give are for things 
that sound utterly goofy. Some of them are utterly goofy. But if you 
look back over history, anything that we now call a great scientific 
breakthrough beforehand, it looked pretty strange and pretty goofy 
itself. You know, I'm reminded of I think it was Freeman Dyson, the 
physicist that for any speculation which does not first seem insane, 
there is no hope. I think that captures the spirit of the Ignobel 
quite well. Mark Abrams, the organizer of tonight's Ignobel Prize 
ceremony at Harvard University. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>