<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981008.2000.0682 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Kosovo Liberation Army today pledged to show self-restraint during 
any NATO air strikes against Serbia. The KLA also announced the unilateral 
cease fire, a statement NATO officials welcomed. The ethnic Albanian 
guerrillas had won loose control over about half of Kosovo before 
a Serb offensive rolled back almost all their territorial gains. During 
the past few months, at least 800 Kosovars have been killed and 250,000 
have been left homeless. The BBC's Paul Wood has been traveling throughout 
the province. We're driving through the former KLA stronghold of Mali 
Shavo. Not one single Albanian remains. Houses and shops have been 
burned. Bullet casings from the Yugoslav summer offensive still litter 
the road and Serbian police in their blue uniforms are everywhere. 
A Kosovo Albanian man at the next settlement, Dragabil, claims that 
the police fired mortar rounds at the village that morning despite 
all the demands from the U.N. and NATO for an end to the conflict. 
All the women and children have left for the hills so they can find 
safety, another man says. At night, we all go so the village is completely 
deserted. The people are adamant there are no KLA fighters in their 
midst and that the police are deliberately attacking civilians. But 
further down the road, we encounter KLA soldiers armed with rocket 
propelled grenades and kalashnikoff's. Their officer, Commander Chilico... 
The KLA remains very strong, but there's a humanitarian crisis here. 
When the Serb forces are defeated by the KLA, they come and take revenge 
on our people and we're extremely angry about this. These are our 
people. Serbian officials say that as long as the KLA remains active, 
it's unrealistic to expect a complete withdrawal of the security forces. 
Air strikes would hand territory to the guerrillas they say. But a 
medical center in the hills of Central Kosovo, refugees say they won't 
go home as long as the police remain. One man says that's despite 
having to live in a field with his five children sheltering under 
a plastic sheet supplied by an aid agency. "We have great expectations 
that NATO will attack," he says. We're in much danger here so we're 
all hoping that NATO will act. That will mean Holbrooke and Clinton 
mean only good to this nation." The fear that tens of thousands of 
refugees could freeze or starve over the winter is one of the main 
factors pushing the West towards air strikes, but air attacks without 
ground troops could lead the Albanian population exposed to reprisals. 
It's an assessment shared by some Yugoslav commentators rather than 
Roshovich of the Serbian media center in Pristina. The Serbian people 
are very proud people. So they can really forgive, forgive, and when 
they get fed up, then it's dangerous. You have as everywhere else 
radicals who say, "We hardly wait to get the first bomb and then we 
will finish with the forever." One Serbian official told me Belgrade 
now fully expects air strikes to take place. Paul Wood, BBC News, 
Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>