<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981008.2000.2034 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tens of thousands of her supporters cheered on Megawate Sucarno Putri 
today as she promised a more just Indonesian government and better 
economic management. The occasion was the start of the Congress of 
Megawate's faction of the Indonesian Democratic Party, the country's 
main opposition group. For Megawate to deliver on her promises, she'll 
have to win next year's planned election. President B.J. Hababie who 
succeeded the now discredit Sujarto five months ago is also expected 
to be a candidate. The BBC's Jonathan Head in Bali says that today, 
Megawate's supporters made their substantial presence felt. They've 
come out to show their support for her in huge numbers and they've 
literally festooned the whole of this part of Bali where the Congress 
is being held in red, the colors of Megawate's party, the PDI. There 
are gangs of youth even late at night driving up and down the road 
with huge red flags, and everywhere there's her face. You really get 
the sense that this is the new popular politician in the making, the 
woman who really sweeps the board with votes in the elections which 
are planned in May next year. Jonathan, are you saying new, but in 
a way, she has been around the political scene in Indonesia. If you 
could remind us a little bit about that. Well, she really emerged 
about six or seven years ago when she first got involved in the PDI 
and she looked like becoming a fairly significant popular figure, 
and that's why we believe that President Sujarto had her removed from 
the leadership of the PDI back in 1996. But since President Sujarto 
has been swept from power, she's taking her chances again and it's 
quite clear from the tens of thousands of people who turned out that 
she's lost none of her popularity. What about economic situation in 
Indonesia? Where is Indonesia right now? What does it think it needs 
in the form of leadership, and is Megawate the kind of person who 
could provide it? Well, the economy is at rock bottom. It's completely 
collapsed. A change of fortunes I think hardly anybody in the world 
can remember from the once booming economy. And, of course, it was 
undone by corruption under former President Sujarto that wasn't properly 
tracked, and by excessive greed. And people who at one stage thought 
they might be escaping poverty and it's a very popular country - there 
are 200 billion people which makes it the fourth largest population 
in the world - now they can't even get enough to eat, they can't afford 
even rice, their basic staple here. It's a very desperate situation. 
The currency has collapsed, and it's going to take a lot more than 
the charisma of Megawate Sucarno Putri to dig it out. Firstly, the 
people around her are trying to forge a coherent economic policy. 
They're veering towards the kind of free market approach having at 
one stage been rather protectionalists. But the fact is they know 
there are no easy answers. There's going to be a lot more suffering 
for the Indonesian people, and indeed a lot more political instability 
for this country. Hopefully at some stage in the future finally emerges 
from its current economic chaos. For people who are looking at the 
situation in Indonesia and wondering if it's moving closer to democracy, 
is the reappearance, the recoming out, as it were, of a Megawate Sucarnno 
Putri who as you say has a reputation largely based upon the fact 
that she is the daughter of the man who ruled Indonesia as a dictator 
for so many years, is this a good sign? I think it is in as much as 
the suppression of Megawate who clearly is so popular here was an 
obviously undemocratic move by former President Sujarto. He understood 
very well that she was potentially extraordinarily popular, which 
is why he used very undemocratic means to crush her. But for all that, 
Indonesian people are hungry for new leadership. Inevitably in a country 
where there's very little practice of open democracy and the issues 
are so complicated and people suffer very much in their daily lives, 
they are going to rally around a symbol that can unite them. It's 
a very diverse country, too, with lots of potential conflicts inside 
it. So I think she should be allowed to go ahead and rise politically. 
She obviously has that potential. And I think although President Habibie 
himself has ambitions, even he seems to recognize that. He is trying 
to develop a more open system where someone like Megawate is likely 
to do very well. Once they've done that, they may have change of leadership; 
it's up to the Indonesians themselves to try to refine their institutions 
for a more genuine democracy. That can't happen overnight; it's bound 
to take a long time. Jonathan Head is the BBC correspondent in Bali. 
Thank you very much, Jonathan. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>