<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981008.2000.2367 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Leggo building blocks just about always keep your child's mind and 
hands busy for hours, all those brightly colored bricks snapping into 
place to form a police station or a fire engine. But the Danish manufacturer 
isn't standing still nor are its Leggos. THE WORLD's Clark Boyd explains. 
Putting together a Leggo creation used to sound like this: And when 
you finally got your Leggos snapped into place, your newly constructed 
toy sounded a little bit like this: That's right. Unless your imagination 
took over and you ran around the room making noises like a helicopter, 
your Leggo toy pretty much just sat there. Well, no more. Introducing 
a Leggo for the 21st century. Meet Torbot, an autonomous robot that 
you can program using a personal computer. Torbot's just one of the 
creations you can make with Leggo's new line of robotic toys called 
Mind Storms. Although Leggo is a Danish company, Mind Storms was born 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The ideas of Mind Storms 
actually go back a long, long way, way back to the 1960s with Seamore 
Pappert. Fred Martin is a research scientist at M.I.T.'s media lab. 
Back in the 1960s, Seamore was working on developing this language 
called Logo for kids to be able to create programs on computers. And 
one of the first things that he and his grad students developed were 
these physical robots that were about the size of a trash can which 
children could drive around the room with their Logo programs. And 
that was sort of the beginnings of the ideas that led to Mind Storms. 
The Leggo company became interested in Pappert's notions about robots 
in the 1980s and began collaboration with M.I.T. to develop a robot 
that would combine Leggo hardware with Pappert's Logo software. At 
the M.I.T. media lab, Fred Martin rummages through several through 
prototypes of the electronic brain that drives the Leggo robots. It's 
called the RCX brick. It's a yellow Leggo style snappable block about 
the size of a small walkman. The RCX isn't just another Leggo block, 
though. It has a microcomputer inside. Here's how it works: First, 
you build your robot, snapping together Leggo bricks the old fashioned 
way. Then you write a program for your creation on your personal computer. 
After you've completed the program, you download it to your robot 
using an infrared sensor. Oh, and don't forget to hit the on switch. 
We like to talk about toys that make you think or toys to think with, 
and it's very important that education be fun, and so we don't think 
toys a bad word. If anything, toy is a good word. Anthony Fudd wouldn't 
shy away from using the word toy. The M.I.T. undergrad employed some 
of his Mind Storms robots while teaching elementary school kids about 
engineering. He says you can't help but learn something by playing 
with Mind Storms. You can make a very simple walking robot that basically 
just uses two motors as its output to turn some type of mechanism 
whether it be gears or wheels to basically make it move. The you can 
move it up from that point and add a sensor. So now you can make not 
only a moving model but an intelligent moving model that can receive 
input from its sensor, and then using that input, determine what it's 
going to do next. And that's very basic to the way that real robots 
are programmed in real research and industry. Fudd designed his first 
Leggo Mind Storms robot to answer a question that's perplexed many 
a great thinker: Does the light in the refrigerator go off when you 
close the door? Well, never fear. Refrigerator Fred is here, complete 
with sunglasses that he raises or lowers depending on the light level. 
When you put him into a darker area such as a closed refrigerator, 
he will raise his sunglasses. Now that happens because he has a light 
sensor which is located on his body, and when the light sensor detects 
a change in light level from a bright light level to a darker light 
level, it will then cut on a motor which then causes the lever to 
raise his Leggo sunglasses. But if Fred is stuck in the refrigerator, 
how do you know he raised his sunglasses? Well, Fudd equipped Fred 
with a two-second delay. If you open the fridge and Fred's glasses 
are up, rest assured the light went off. Does Refrigerator Fred signal 
the first step toward a more robo friendly, robo permeated society? 
Mark Tilden, robotics research scientist at the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory says that terminator phobia keeps many Americans from welcoming 
such advances in robotics. People will because they've been watching 
Frankenstein and machines that's been going nuts for years. Suddenly 
they think, "Oh, my goodness. This machine's going to steal my Visa 
cards and drive off to Radio Shack and raid their battery section." 
That's nonsense, of course, but the fact is that we see it happen 
all the time. And you're going to see that fear prevalent. We like 
things that are biologically based and when something moves without 
us controlling it, we get a little antsy right now just because we're 
not used to it. But Tilden does think that Leggo Mind Storms is a 
good first step, a way to acclimate a new generation of Americans 
to a robotic future. Say when we're old and infirm, we can't walk 
anymore, we'd actually put on a pair of pants which would just assist 
in our walking so it would give us the full dignity of motion. These 
are concepts which are currently being explored in places like Japan. 
But I mean, it could still get to be even tackled right here. These 
are the sort of things that we really should be looking into, but 
the fact is it's going to take a major change in the way that people 
think of it. Granted, we shouldn't expect the "Jetson's" robo assisted 
cartoon lifestyle to become reality anytime soon, but don't tell Leggo 
that. They're taking their Mind Storms robots global. Foreign language 
versions will go on sale in Europe and Asia next year. And who knows, 
maybe those Leggos will engage in some cross-cultural communication. 
R2D2, you know better than to trust a strange computer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>