<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981008.2000.0929 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As reported earlier by a 258 to 176 vote, the House of Representatives 
today authorized a wide-ranging impeachment inquiry of President Clinton. 
Mr. Clinton thus is the third chief executive in history to face the 
prospect of removal from office. The investigation will be open-ended 
and begin with the president's affair with White House intern Monica 
Lewinsky and his subsequent attempts to conceal it. As in the United 
States, media coverage overseas has ranged all over the map literally, 
but as THE WORLD's Andrew North explains, today's global front pages 
share a similar mood. If there's one thing common to the latest media 
coverage of the Monica Lewinsky affair around the world, it's boredom. 
But mixed with concern that Washington's obsession with the investigation 
is diverting the White House's attention from much more important 
issues like the conflict in Kosovo, or the global economic crisis. 
But the view from Bohn, according to Joseph Joffy of Germany's Sudai 
Shazoitim newspaper, is of a president still in touch with the outside 
world. That's perhaps the greatest surprise for Europeans as well 
as Americans, would assume, that somehow in this 24-hour day minus 
a few hours for sleeping, Clinton still manages to keep his hands 
on the foreign policy pillar. In fact, the air strikes that NATO has 
finished planning for today and which may soon come, in fact, have 
been mainly the work of American - the result of American leadership 
if not American pressure. Little has been heard from Monica Lewinsky 
herself since independent counsel Kenneth Starr published the report 
on his investigation last month. One report has her in Australia working 
on her autobiography. But if you want to catch sight of her, Greece 
may be as good a place as any. According to the country's newspapers 
today, a Greek fashion company has signed her up to model two of its 
dresses later this month. Lewinsky's reported fee is $125,000. Other 
countries in the Mediterranean region have got more serious reasons 
for being interested in President Clinton's troubles, those involved 
with the Middle East peace process. Among Arab states, Ed Blanche, 
foreign editor of Lebanon's "Daily Sun" newspaper says talk of impeaching 
President Clinton brings on mixed emotions. Privately, many people 
in the world are probably rubbing their hand with glee, but I think 
in the more prosaic longer term, having a weak president in Washington 
does not help the Middle East in any way at all. So I think in the 
long term, people are a little concerned as to how this will affect 
U.S. foreign policy such as it is, and they see Israel I think gaining 
from this, the tail wagging the dog, so to speak. The global financial 
crisis is knocking at our door and that's definitely the priority 
now in Brazil. That's THE WORLD's Paula Golby in Rio de Janeiro, and 
she says the Lewinsky scandal has been pushed off the front pages 
by fears of an all-out economic collapse in the country. But what 
would worry Brazilians, Golby says, is a repeat of 1974. Let's say 
for example, during the case of the Watergate, it paralyzed the American 
government for a time. And the world situation at the moment does 
not permit that the United States is paralyzed. I mean, there's a 
financial global crisis. Definitely it's very important that the United 
States now proceeds with political stability. That hope is mirrored 
by newspapers around the world, but most opinion pages have already 
decided that events in Washington in 1998 are very different to events 
24 years ago. Under the Clinton presidency, however hobbled, will 
last out its full term. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>