<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981008.2000.3000 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The West's top peace envoy to Bosnia said today he's decided to remove 
a Bosnian Serb nationalist from office due to threatening remarks 
about possible NATO intervention in Kosovo. It was an example of the 
strange kind of self-government in Bosnia that grew out of the Dayton 
Peace Accord of 1995. That agreement paved the way for a U.S. commitment 
of troops, economic aid, and diplomatic prestige to keep the peace 
in the former Yugoslavia. Last month, Bosnians, voted in the third 
general elections since the peace accord, but as THE WORLD's David 
Lavalle reports, it's not clear whether the vote move Bosnia any closer 
to the goal of a peaceful multi-ethnic society. Official Washington 
hoped that last month's Bosnian elections would affirm the Dayton 
Peace Accords, and that's exactly what happened according to U.S. 
special envoy Robert Delbard. The overall results of the elections 
have been extraordinarily important and positive in terms of moving 
in the directions to further the goals of the Dayton agreement and 
to promote further development of Democratic pluralism. What's important 
to recognize is that these elections took place democratically. Nicole 
Zulch is a spokeswoman for the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe, which carried out the Bosnian elections. It only has been 
2-1/2 years since people were killing each other in this country, 
and I think each election has been a step forward for the democratic 
process, and I don't think we can expect things to happen overnigiht. 
As if to prove the point, extreme nationalist Nicola Paplaushen, a 
man with ties to indicted war crimes suspects, defeated the moderate 
president of Bosnia Serb Republic. Paplaushen's election was troubling 
because it makes it harder for Washington to present a picture of 
any kind of progress. Chris Hedges, former Balkan bureau chief for 
the "New York Times" says Paplaushen's victory representatives a challenge 
for American policy in Bosnia. What to do when the wrong party wins? 
The only way to break a grip with that the nationalists have on power 
is to deny them the ability to run in the elections, to essentially 
destroy these pernicious ethnically based parties that promote nothing 
other than ethnic triumphalism and often direct racism towards other 
ethnic groups. I think that until there is a major reform of the election 
laws to essentially lock these people out of the power structure, 
you can't begin to change anything. But Susan Woodward of the Brookings 
Institution thinks Washington's support of the elections was vindicated 
by several moderate victories in parliament over hard line nationalists. 
That's not to say she considers U.S. policy in Bosnia to be flawless. 
While the overall strategy may be good, the need in my view to have 
some real adjustment towards a policy that thinks about when we can 
leave and how best to leave by working much more closely with Bosnians 
on the ground than we are doing now. But so far, there's been little 
discussion of any exit strategy for the 32,000 NATO led troops which 
keep the inter-ethnic peace in Bosnia. In fact, Washington's attention 
appears to have shifted away from Bosnia to the Serbian province of 
Kosovo, where the threat of U.S.-led NATO air strikes is gaining momentum 
daily. Brian Atwood, administrator of the U.S. Agency for International 
Development warns that military intervention could carry a political 
price. Clearly, if we're forced to bomb, there will be some anti-West 
sentiments. That's just one of the costs of trying to help the people 
who are being subjected to human rights abuses in Kosovo. But we can't 
ignore the possibility that radicals might their hands strengthened 
somewhat by an anti-West reaction. That's yet another threat to the 
Bosnian peace process that American policy makers will have to manage 
in the coming months. Meanwhile, the United States will be watching 
Bosnia's newly elected and more moderate collective presidency very 
closely. It's three members held their first informal session yesterday 
in Sarajevo. For THE WORLD, I'm David Lavalle. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>