<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981008.2000.3241 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tomorrow, an album of music from Colombia will be released in the 
United States. This is not the Andian pan pipe music frequently heard 
on the sidewalks of world capitals. This is rock and roll. But as 
THE WORLD's Marco Worman tells us, it's rock and roll with a poetic 
edge. They say they detest goody two shoes American rock. They single 
out the Beach Boys. Bogata-based Blockay prefers to bathe in the tough 
sound of groups like Ten Years After. When they speak about their 
influences, the members of Blockay mention Led Zepplin, Janis Joplin, 
and even Felonious Monk. But high upon the list, band member Carlos 
Ela the names of non-musicians as well. We have many influences and 
writers like Raymond Carver, like Sam Sheppard, like Bukovsky, and 
writers from Colombia, Lavaistas, from poets like beat niks. The second 
generation beat writer, Charles Bukovsky is known for wallowing in 
the beautiful misery of life filtered through alcohol and drugs. Blokay 
guitarist Teto Ocampo says that sensibly echoes the mood of his country. 
It's got a lot to do, I mean, with modern Colombia. I mean, Bukovsky 
knows how to find poetry in the garbage in Colombia or like Bogota 
is not as beautiful. It's pretty ugly and pretty messy. And if you 
can find poetry there, then it's similar to these guys beat niks. 
Blockay's chief songwriter, Ivan Benevides says Bogota keeps his pen 
busy. You know, Bogota is like a big sort of a city that doesn't exist. 
The city's completely mad. It's a good location for a writer between 
the violence and the beauty, you shock. And it makes you write songs. 
It makes him write songs about an eclectic range of subjects from 
Colombian soccer super star Valderamo to painter Fernando Botero. 
Again, band member Carlos Ela. Ivan who is the one who writes the 
songs. He could describe like the whole Colombian reality in a bathroom, 
you know. There's a song called, there's something rocking in the 
bathroom. And it's like the description of the pressure life I Colombia 
in a bathroom. Majana is an example of the sound that Blockay guitarist 
Teto Ocampo admits he needs help describing. Well, a friend of ours 
told us that it was pscyhoprotical funk. On this track, Blockay puts 
its only female member, Matte Motero out in front for a good old fashioned 
Colombian party tune. In its rat race descriptions of Bogota's urban 
blight, Blockay still knows how to crack a smile. For THE WORLD, this 
is Marco Worman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>