<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981002.1830.1445 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Finally, this evening, a "closer look" at a treat for the eye, and 
an invitation to the imagination. On Sunday in Washington, the national 
gallery will open and exhibition called van gogh's van gogh's. 72 
paintings by the extraordinary Dutch painter form the van gogh museum 
in Holland, which is being renovated. While it is, the national gallery 
here has this once in a generation opportunity. In part it's the mystery 
of the man, seen here in his own hand. The bold strokes of color and 
nervous energy that have arrested the world's attention for so long. 
His self portraits are a chronology of an artist looking into his 
own soul and painting from it. There is no image like a van gogh, 
they are the most identifiable kind of images, whether they are landscapes 
or still lifes. Van gogh's life as an artist was brief and tortured 
and prolific -- 750 paintings and 1,600 drawings in only ten years. 
And he has become a legend, even a pop icon. You can get to van gogh 
within seconds on the Internet. Van gogh memorabilia is wildly popular. 
Thousands of people visit his grave site. There have been hundreds 
of books and dozens of movies. No painting has ever sold for more 
than a van gogh. So what is it that attracts admiration to this degree? 
He looked in the mirror and was able to give you back what was in 
his heart and soul on that day. The paintings in the Washington exhibition 
fill ten rooms. Here is the story of van gogh's tempestuous life -- 
his joys -- his sorrows -- his passion -- his pain. In 1885, at 32, 
firmly committed to being a painter, and uneasy with his family's 
middle class life, van gogh paints the peasants he so admires. The 
broken shoes, a Stark description of working-class hardship. He lived 
with these people. He identified with these people. In the last ten 
years of his life, we can see the tragedy of him unfolding in the 
letters he writes to his brother. "What I am in the eyes of most people, 
a nonentity, an eccentric or an unpleasant person, somebody who has 
no position in society and never will have. In short, the lowest of 
the low." For a short period of time, van gogh lived in the town of 
arles, in the south of France. Here in the south, his work assimilates 
all the wonderful colors around him. Without question Van gogh's favorite 
color was yellow. The Divine color. And this is his sunny period. 
This is his bedroom. And this is the yellow house. He at the time 
was hoping to bring some of his artist friends to arles to establish 
not a school. But other artists found him too difficult. Van Gogh 
sank deeper into depression. He lived the last days of life at auvers 
sur oise outside Paris. His paintings turn darker. He writes to his 
brother Theo -- "there are vast fields of wheat under troubled skies. 
And I did not have to go out of my way to try to express sadness and 
extreme loneliness." The final descent, the final painting -- wheat 
field with crows, dark skies, ominous crows. Three roads to nowhere. 
In July of 1890, van gogh shot himself in these very fields. He was 
37 years old. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>