<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981002.1830.0594 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Kenneth Starr's report to Congress, two of the offenses which he 
believes qualifies for impeachment are obstruction of justice and 
witness tampering. On those two issues, the behavior of two people 
is crucial to the investigation. The president's friend Vernon Jordan 
and his secretary Betty Currie. Their testimony to the grand jury 
was also released today. Here's ABC's Jackie Judd. The Starr report 
portrayed Vernon Jordan as a fixer, the man who helped Monica Lewinsky 
get a job and a lawyer when she was subpoenaed in the Paula Jones 
case, who kept Mr. Clinton constantly informed of his efforts. Starr 
concluded the job search was to guarantee Lewinsky would sign an affidavit 
denying she and Mr. Clinton had a sexual relationship. But in the 
testimony released today, when prosecutors asked if there was a connection 
between the job and the affidavit, Jordan said, absolutely, unequivocally, 
no. According to Jordan's testimony, Lewinsky was the aggressor in 
the job search, she called him so oofen, it came annoying. Jordan 
said he was satisfied when both denied they were having an affair 
and believed Lewinsky had a "bobbysoxer" crush on the president. He 
claims he never became involved in the drafting of the false affidavit 
and only "skimmed" it when Lewinsky showed it to him. What about all 
the phone calls from Jordan to the president, and to Lewinsky, often 
in quick succession? And during critical points of activity. Jordan 
maintained keeping the president posted about Lewinsky was "nothing 
special. It was also at the same time we were discussing other matters 
of state." The testimony of the president's personal secretary, Betty 
Currie is less straight forward. Some aspects of her testimony changed 
over time, on other matters, Currie said she couldn't remember. But 
what may be troublesome for the president is a recollection of two 
conversations in which Starr concluded Mr. Clinton was trying to get 
Currie to back his false testimony. And shape her own testimony if 
she became a witness. For example, Currie says the president wished 
me to agree with him that he and Lewinsky were never alone. They both 
knew that was not the case. From the day the Starr report went to 
Capitol Hill, democrats and republicans have battled over the real 
strength of the obstruction of justice charges against the president. 
The testimony of Currie and Jordan, released today, gives each side 
some more points to work with. Anything new here, what difference 
does any of this make? There is a lot of new detail, especially as 
you said for people who regard this as a soap opera, this story of 
Linda Tripp's betrayal is very unappealing. She comes off as not a 
likeable person. In terms of the evidence, what really matters on 
question of impeachment, it seems to me we're very much where we were. 
Okay. Jeffrey, thank you very much. Short and sweet. Have a good weekend. 
The next step in all this comes on Monday when the house Judiciary 
committee meets to decide whether to recommend an official impeachment 
inquiry. If it does, the full house will vote on Friday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>