<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981002.1830.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Washington it was one part evidence and one part soap opera. The 
house Judiciary committee released nearly 5,000 pages of document 
turned over to it by the independent counsel Kenneth Starr. Most anticipated 
were the transcripts of the phone conversations between Linda Tripp 
and Monica Lewinsky. It is the saga of their relationship. Here's 
ABC's John Cochran. Transcripts released shed new light on Linda Tripp. 
I never, ever asked to be placed in this position. But during one 
of the phone conversations she taped, she encourages Monica Lewinsky 
to insist the White House fined her a good job, Tripp says one way 
or another they can get you a job. Fearing their phone conversations 
are tapped, Lewinsky insists on meeting face to face. Federal agents 
had body wired trip. They told her to look for evidence of obstruction 
of justice. During the conversation Tripp returns time and again to 
Jordan apparently trying to illicit information about his role. "I 
think having the most powerful attorney in the nation take you under 
his wing is protection." And a little later -- "you have a huge heavy-hitter 
in your back pocket who has set everything up for you." And later 
-- "Monica, be -- be real here. That's a very powerful friend to have, 
not the big creep" -- meaning the president -- "but the other one." 
But while Tripp seems to be trying to manipulate Lewinsky, Lewinsky 
appears to be doing the same to her. Desperate for Tripp not to reveal 
the affair with the president, Lewinsky warns her -- "you will then 
have caused a lot more trouble, and then you're surely gonna lose 
your job." Lewinsky starts crying. Tripp says -- "our relationship 
is now so strained from this." Lewinsky -- "it is." Tripp -- "I can 
see it in your eyes." Lewinsky -- "because you know why? Because I'm 
scared." Lewinsky again pleads with her to keep silent. Tripp -- "then 
what would happen?" Lewinsky -- "then I think you would be safe in 
your job." Tripp -- "oh, no, I'm not." Lewinsky -- "and safe in youlife." 
But today the only action from the White House came from a lawyer 
accusing Tripp of manipulating Lewinsky. It is Linda Tripp who in 
the tape recordings she made can be heard actively engaging Ms. Lewinsky 
in discussions about how both could avoid testifying about Ms. Lewinsky's 
relationship with the president. The White House is now looking for 
villains to divert attention from the president's misdeeds. It believes 
it has found a villain. Linda Tripp. Peter? Thank you, John. John 
Cochran in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>