<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981002.1020 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the clock ticking down to possible NATO airstrikes, Serb authorities 
scrambled Friday to show they are complying with U.N. demands to pull 
back their forces and bring peace to Kosovo. The ethnic Albanians' 
political leader called it a false show, and said he would welcome 
NATO strikes on Serbia. ``The most critical issue is to stop the war 
machine of Belgrade and to protect the people of Kosovo,'' said Ibrahim 
Rugova, who wants to settle peacefully the Serb-Albanian standoff 
in Kosovo. ``That's an issue of humanity.'' In a flurry of moves, 
the Serbs invited U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan to visit the southern 
Serbian province, issued a new appeal for talks with ethnic Albanian 
negotiators, removed a key police roadblock and showed reporters heavy 
equipment they said has been withdrawn. But Annan turned down the 
offer and the ethnic Albanians indicated they aren't willing to talk 
until fighting stops. Britain and the United States, keeping up the 
pressure on Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, warned that time 
to prevent intervention is running out. ``We cannot allow this conflict 
to spread again and risk what we stopped in Bosnia starting over again 
in Kosovo,'' U.S. President Bill Clinton said. The international furor 
over the Serbs' eight-month crackdown in separatist Kosovo has intensified 
this week, pushing the United States and other countries to the verge 
of long-threatened airstrikes. The Serbs' efforts to crush separatist 
resistance in the province, which is populated largely by ethnic Albanians, 
has killed hundreds of people and driven about 275,000 from their 
homes. Even as the Serbs said this week that they were halting their 
action against Kosovo ``terrorists,'' evidence surfaced of at least 
two massacres of civilians in the Drenica region within recent days. 
Claiming that media reports wrongly portray the situation in Kosovo, 
Serb authorities said Annan should come himself to see the ``real 
situation.'' But Annan's spokesman, Fred Eckhard, said the secretary-general 
was already receiving reports from U.N. officials in the area. Late 
Friday, the independent Beta news agency said Serbia's Deputy Premier 
Ratko Markovic had invited an ethnic Albanian negotiating team to 
meet as soon as possible to resume the political dialogue which broke 
down last May. But Fehmi Agani, chief ethnic Albanian negotiator, 
said the letter seemed to be intended to ease some of the increasing 
international pressure on Serbia rather than a sincere move. ``I don't 
see how negotiations can possibly continue at this point when the 
fighting in Kosovo has not ceased to this date,'' Agani said. Things 
were moving on the ground in Kosovo. Serb police removed a roadblock 
on the road from Pristina to Pec, a highly visible symbol of the heavy 
police presence in Kosovo. Also, Serb officials showed reporters heavy 
police equipment and weapons they say have been withdrawn from the 
Kosovo conflict. Many of the men, they say, have been sent on leave. 
A makeshift bunker of truck tires and sandbags at Komorane, 20 kilometers 
(12 miles) west of Pristina, since the start of the conflict in February 
was removed. At a special police forces base at Ajvalija, the largest 
police base in Kosovo located about five kilometers (three miles) 
east of Pristina, Col. Bozidar Filic showed reporters seven armored 
personnel carriers, armored jeeps and other vehicles, plus a Bell 
helicopter, saying all had been withdrawn from the conflict with the 
ethnic Albanians. But Rugova and the ethnic Albanians weren't buying 
the Serbs' statements. ``The Serb military forces have not withdrawn 
from Kosovo, they have only changed their tactical position,'' Rugova 
told reporters. ``The situation continues to be grave and dangerous.'' 
The Kosovo Information Center, close to the province's ethnic Albanian 
leadership, reported Serb forces attacked two villages Friday near 
Malisevo in southwestern Kosovo, then sent in reinforcements when 
KLA rebels showed heavy resistance. For its part, the pro-Serb Media 
Center said Yugoslav army border guards came under grenade-launcher 
fire from inside Albania's territory near the Pogaj border outpost 
opposite Prizren, Kosovo. The top Serbian official in Kosovo lashed 
out at what he said were ``daily fabrications of new massacres by 
the ethnic Albanian propaganda machine.'' Veljko Odalovic, head of 
the provincial government, accused world powers of helping terrorists 
in Kosovo by threatening Serbia and the Yugoslav Federation. Britain, 
among the most vocal supporters of NATO action as a last resort, joined 
the United States in delivering a strong warning. ``This is a humanitarian 
disaster,'' Prime Minister Tony Blair told Channel 4 TV News in London. 
``I believe it will only be stopped if Milosevic gets the clearest 
possible message ... namely, if you carry on doing this, you will 
face a military penalty.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>