<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981002.1076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israel on Friday sealed its borders with the West Bank and Gaza Strip 
indefinitely following warnings by the defense minister that the Islamic 
militant group Hamas plotted an ``unprecedented, horrific'' attack 
in Israel. The closure came as Israeli and Palestinian negotiators 
reported some progress in talks on a West Bank troop withdrawal. A 
Hamas bombing would disrupt the U.S.-brokered negotiations which are 
to climax with a four-day Mideast summit in Washington in mid-October. 
However, the Palestinians denounced the closure as collective punishment, 
saying it would hurt the Palestinian economy and keep tens of thousands 
of workers from their jobs. Israeli and Palestinian security forces 
have thwarted recent attempts by Hamas to carry out attacks in Israel 
in retaliation for the killing of two of the group's fugitives by 
Israeli soldiers. A Palestinian security official said Friday that 
two Hamas activists were caught a week ago with 60 kilos (130 pounds) 
of explosives. The two were en route to the Nahal Oz crossing between 
the Gaza Strip and Israel, the official said. Earlier this week, a 
Hamas activist was killed when a car rigged with explosives blew up 
in a West Bank village. In the West Bank town of Hebron, Palestinian 
police seized nearly a ton of explosives in a raid of a Hamas bomb 
factory. Hamas has carried out more than a dozen suicide bombings 
in Israel since 1994 and has threatened new attacks. In troubled Hebron, 
meanwhile, dozens of Palestinians hurled stones and empty bottles 
at Israeli soldiers who fired rubber-coated steel pellets. Seven Palestinians 
were injured, including one who was in serious condition. Clashes 
erupted before and after Muslim noon prayers. The Israeli-controlled 
downtown area of Hebron has been under curfew since Wednesday when 
two grenades were thrown at Israeli security forces, wounding 22 people. 
Hebron is home to 450 Jewish settlers and 130,000 Palestinians. Israeli 
Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai decided after consultations with 
top army generals Friday to seal the West Bank and Gaza indefinitely. 
The Israeli newspaper Maariv quoted Mordechai as telling the Cabinet 
on Thursday that ``Hamas wants to carry out a horrific, unprecedented 
attack in Israel.'' Israeli government spokesman Moshe Fogel said 
the Palestinian Authority has taken sporadic steps to control Hamas, 
but ``it's far short of what we would like.'' Fogel warned that an 
attack would hurt the peace process. In the past, Israel has suspended 
talks with the Palestinians after large-scale attacks by Palestinian 
militants. However, Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat said the closure 
constituted collective punishment and that Israel must stop taking 
unilateral steps. ``Instead of taking us as partners, they (the Israelis) 
subject us to closures,'' he said. U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright is to arrive Tuesday in the Middle East for two days of talks 
to prepare for an summit meeting in Washington. U.S. President Bill 
Clinton invited Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
to Washington to try to complete a long-delayed agreement over a further 
Israeli pullback in the West Bank. Saeb Erekat said the summit will 
take place Oct. 15-19. Netanyahu faces conflicting pressures inside 
his own coalition government. A Cabinet minister from the pro-settler 
National Religious Party declared that Netanyahu should refuse to 
go to Washington. Science Minister Silvan Shalom, from Netanyahu's 
Likud Party rejected that, but only for tactical reasons. He told 
Israel radio that ``Israel would get all the blame'' for a breakdown 
of the peace talks and would face isolation in the world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>