<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981002.0815 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yugoslavia's Serb leadership invited U.N. chief Kofi Annan to visit, 
saying Friday it would help him understand ``the real situation in 
Kosovo'' after international condemnation of massacres of ethnic Albanian 
civilians and the threat of NATO airstrikes. But in New York, Annan's 
spokesman, Fred Eckhard, said the secretary-general declined, saying 
he was already receiving reports from U.N. officials in the area. 
The invitation, carried by the state-run Tanjug news agency, came 
after an ethnic Albanian man gave human rights workers a graphic account 
of what he said was a Saturday massacre of 13 ethnic Albanian men 
by Serbian police in a Kosovo forest. The Serb invitation also came 
days before Annan is scheduled to submit a report on compliance with 
a U.N. Security Council resolution demanding an end to the Kosovo 
offensive by Serbian police and the Yugoslav army. The resolution 
threatens unspecified further action if the demand is ignored _ a 
condition seen by some NATO countries as opening the door to military 
intervention. Serb police have denied killing civilians, and Yugoslav 
Foreign Minister Zivadin Jovanovic said Thursday in Washington that 
his government is willing to let an international team take part in 
an investigation to ``establish and prove the facts.'' The Foreign 
Ministry in the Yugoslav capital Belgrade said invitations had already 
gone out to forensic experts from Finland. Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic launched a crackdown in February against rebels in Kosovo 
who are seeking independence for the province in southern Serbia that 
is 90 percent ethnic Albanian. On Thursday, Peter Bouckaert of New 
York-based Human Rights Watch said the wounded ethnic Albanian man, 
whose name was not released to protect him, recounted how he survived 
the Saturday massacre. The man's story was corroborated by other witnesses 
from Golubovac, a village three miles (five kilometers) from Donje 
Obrinje, the site of another massacre, Bouckaert said. Relating the 
man's account, Bouckaert said Serb police sent old men into nearby 
woods to tell refugees it was safe to come out of their hiding place. 
Police then selected about 20 to 25 of the men; the older ones were 
eventually let go. The rest were forced to lie on their stomachs with 
their hands behind their heads. All were beaten and kicked and told 
if they would say who in the group belonged to the rebel Kosovo Liberation 
Army, the rest could go free. Finally, ``one policeman executed them 
all with short bursts of automatic fire,'' Bouckaert said the survivor 
told him. After two trips up and down the line, the policemen kicked 
each victim. The man said he waited about 10 or 15 minutes, then fled 
home, where his mother and wife waited, according to Bouckaert. In 
New York, the U.N. Security Council condemned ``those responsible'' 
for the bloodletting in Kosovo, but Britain and the United States 
failed to convince Russia and China to specifically blame the Serbs. 
The council called on Milosevic to identify, find and punish the killers. 
Amid warnings of military strikes, President Bill Clinton said Friday 
that the United States and its allies must remain ``very, very strong'' 
in demanding that Milosevic loosen his stranglehold on ethnic Albanians 
in Kosovo. ``We cannot allow this conflict to spread again and risk 
what we stopped in Bosnia starting over again in Kosovo,'' Clinton 
said. Britain, among the most vocal supporters of NATO action as a 
last resort, delivered strong warnings Friday. ``This is a humanitarian 
disaster,'' Prime Minister Tony Blair told Channel 4 TV News in London. 
``I believe it will only be stopped if Milosevic gets the clearest 
possible message ... namely, if you carry on doing this, you will 
face a military penalty.'' But Russia's parliament declared Friday 
that any NATO military action taken without U.N. approval would be 
considered an ``illegal act of aggression.'' On Thursday, Serbian 
Deputy Premier Vojislav Seselj threatened retaliation against NATO 
personnel outside Yugoslavia if the alliance launched strikes against 
Yugoslav or Serbian targets to stop the bloodshed in Kosovo. In Bosnia 
on Friday, spokesman Maj. Richard Saint-Louis said NATO troops there 
will protect themselves if attacked. Most ethnic Albanians in Kosovo 
support independence, although many Western nations do not, fearing 
it could further destabilize the Balkans. In Washington, the U.S. 
State Department urged Americans in Yugoslavia to consider leaving. 
Spokesman James Rubin said military action is closer to a reality 
``because of Belgrade's failure to comply with the requirements of 
the international community.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>