<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981002.2130.1515 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Audiences are used to seeing Robin Williams in bizarre settings from 
"ork" to "never-never land." But as Dennis Michael reports, we've 
never seen him in a place like this. "what dreams may come" may be 
like "2001" or "star wars" -- a film where special effects and storytelling 
blend in such a way that the movies are never quite the same again. 
Director Vincent Ward and Robin Williams lead a cast and crew that 
takes the audience beyond death and into an incredible afterlife. 
You're making all of this. See, we're all pretty insecure at first, 
so we see ourselves somewhere safe, comforting. We all paint our own 
surroundings, Chris, but you're the first guy I know to use real paint. 
That's a great thing. I mean, that should be -- that's a wonderful 
thing to say. "And now we're gonna take you someplace you haven't 
been, brace yourself." And yet but it does take you to places, other 
places, you may not want to go but maybe you'll kind of look at it 
in a different way. "what dreams may come" is not a religious film, 
but co-star Cuba Gooding, Jr. is a religious person and he felt right 
at home. The scripture -- "in my house there are many mansions and 
I go to prepare a place for you." And that was always personalized 
to me. That heaven is the mansion that I see it to be. But "what dreams 
may come" is not just big-screen metaphysics. It's a romance. I thought 
it was a very beautiful, very profound love story. Love in every incarnation. 
Williams' character, Chris, learns that he'll be forever separated 
from his beloved wife in the afterlife and won't accept it. I'm her 
soul mate. I can find her. You don't understand how it it works. It's 
not about understanding! It's about not giving up! It's an act of 
immense courage to walk into hell, another act of immense courage 
to green light a film that breaks every mold. Director Ward gives 
polygram pictures high praise. It took a leap. It took a very brave 
company that said, "okay, we're gonna trust you guys." I mean, you 
know, look I had an academy award-winning screenwriter and seven academy 
award winners involved in the making of this film. So that definitely 
helps. But we took a leap and, you know, the rule of thumb is, "don't 
look down." It's an intimate epic. It has a scope that is outrageous. 
But yet at the core are these very intimate scenes. So, that alone 
is also interesting, jumping back and forth between those two. "what 
dreams may come" isn't just something new to see, but perhaps, is 
a new way of seeing. Dennis Michael, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>