<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981002.1600.0552 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
we will achieve compliance one way or another. that's what a british 
official says about the u.n. determination to get yugoslav president 
milosevic to pull out troops from the kosovo region. tom mintier has 
more on the preparations. the countdown to some type of military action 
may already be under way. both the british and u.s. governments have 
urged nationals to prepare to leave yugoslavia. the united nations 
and the security council met in urgent session to deal with the situation 
in kosovo. council members strongly condemned those responsible for 
these atrocities and they called upon president slobodan milosevic 
and the government in belgrade to immediately to investigate. belgrade 
has already responded, offering to allow international experts to 
look into the massacres of ethnic albanian civilians in kosovo. serb 
police have denied killing civilians. britain's defense secretary 
made the message clear. if you are listening in belgrade, listen now 
and realize that the clock is ticking for you. prime minister tony 
blair sounded just as determined. we've got to be prepared to take 
whatever action is necessary in order to make him back down. and if 
we don't, my fear all the way through has been that he will play a 
game of brinkmanship with us. while the rhetoric heats up, representatives 
from the six-nation contact group on yugoslavia met here in london. 
the special meeting was to discuss possible political solutions to 
the conflict in kosovo. while the diplomats talk, the planners at 
nato prepare the united states has some 40 f-16s on standby at aviano 
air base in northern italy, another 50 f-18s and f-14s on the aircraft 
carrier "eisenhower" and more strike aircraft in germany, england 
and turkey. nato watchers feel a strike, if one is used, may not be 
strong enough to change things on the ground in kosovo. in the meantime, 
the situation worsens for the ethnic albanians in kosovo. food is 
short, and winter is approaching. refugee organizations are worried 
that the situation is getting more serious day by day. if we do not 
get more aid through to the refugees from the problems in kosovo, 
there will be a major humanitarian catastrophe, people will be dying 
in three or four week's time either from starvation or from hypothermia. 
on the streets of belgrade, people are understandably concerned. this 
woman says the thought of military strikes give her the shivers. this 
man says it is impossible to think of bombings at the end of the 20th 
century. i have the feeling that it is somehow inevitable. while the 
possibility of some type of nato action is growing, the big question 
is -- when? a week ago, the u.n. security council ordered president 
milosevic to pull his special forces out of kosovo. the next message 
delivered by nato could be more direct. tom mintier, cnn, london. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>