<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981002.2130.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The earthquake of evidence from Ken Starr's investigation saw another 
aftershock today. The house Judiciary committee released more documents, 
including transcripts of Linda Tripp's secretly taped conversations 
with Monica Lewinsky. White House lawyers say Tripp manipulated Lewinsky 
to help Starr expand his investigation and that her role weakens the 
case. In one of the conversations, Lewinsky herself defined Tripp's 
central role, saying -- also released today -- testimony from the 
president's secretary, Betty Currie. Eileen O'Connor has more. Betty 
Currie thought of herself as a friend almost a mother to Monica Lewinsky. 
Discussing families, travels, girl talk. She says she could see that 
Monica was infatuated with the president whom she called handsome, 
even in front of Betty Currie, but Betty Currie was also the president's 
secretary telling the grand jury, among her other duties she testified 
"I handle his gifts." That duty and her sense of duty ultimately catches 
Betty Currie between her friend and her employer, the president. In 
her first grand jury appearance the prosecutors confirm what Betty 
Currie has told them from the beginning, that Monica Lewinsky asked 
her to pick up gifts the president had given Lewinsky for Currie to 
hold. The prosecutors ask -- according to Monica Lewinsky, Currie 
called her after Lewinsky had mentioned to the president her concern 
about the gifts under subpoena in the Paula Jones case. Lewinsky testified 
-- but as concern grows over press reports about possible obstruction 
of justice charges against the president because of Currie's handling 
of the gifts, his loyal secretary's memory wanes. On July 22nd, Betty 
Currie says she never knew the box contained gifts from the president, 
just stuff is what she says. "I remembered more back then, I think, 
than I do today." Says Currie. Currie testifies she knows that White 
House staffers Nancy hernreich and Stephen goodin don't want Lewinsky 
hanging around the president even labeling her bad news. But despite 
her standing as a church-going, truth telling, friend, she admits 
bringing Lewinsky in a back way a number of times, sneaking Lewinsky 
in on the 13th of November. Betty Currie seemed to be one of the more 
sympathetic characters in this national tragedy. Yet now, some White 
House aides now see her as part of the problem enabling a president 
and a young woman hell bent on self-destruction. Eileen O'Connor, 
CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>