<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981002.2100.0717 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Monday morning at 9:00 A.M. the house Judiciary committee starts its 
inquiry into whether or not there should be formal impeachment proceedings 
against this president. Serious business, more serious than the increasingly 
salacious details that have gotten much of the attention in this story 
thus far. To give us their thoughts on this, we are joined by two 
members of the House of Representatives, representative Ed Bryant, 
and the dean of the democratic minority in the house, representative 
John Dingell, on the hill for tonight's purposes. Congressman Dingell, 
I'd like to start with you. You were invariably described as the powerful 
chairman of the house commerce committee. What's in it for the republicans 
to accept what the republicans laid out today, this impeachment light 
proposal that would result in it all being over November 25 and the 
end result would be censure? -- Censure? It's always been my thesis 
this should be open, expeditious and fair. Frankly, I don't see any 
reason why we need to take longer than the first of December to address 
this and finish it off and go about the nation's business. Quite frankly, 
the people are looking for us to deal with the business of the nation, 
which is important and get this sorry mess over with. They seem to 
be quite tired of it. And congressman Bryant, how much of that is 
gnawing on members on both sides of the Judiciary committee? There's 
that nagging issue that this is now a nagging case before the country 
and there are several years of this president's second term? Well, 
it's certainly something we want to consider, and that is a fair, 
quick resolution just as soon as possible and certainly congressman 
Dingell is one who has stood up and acted in a bipartisan manner in 
this and I'm proud to be on TV tonight to talk with him about this. 
In the end, we should not set artificial deadlines. We want to get 
at the truth here. With the cooperation of all parties involved, it 
should be accomplished. What's wrong with the democrats' November 
25th proposal? Well, it's a deadline, precisely what we don't need, 
to pick a date out and say let's finish it by this time. If we get 
the cooperation of everyone and hopefully get the other information 
the independent counsel might have out there in other matters so that 
we can not just conclude the Monica Lewinsky part but the entire thing 
from filegate to travelgate and Whitewater and Kathleen Willey, let's 
get it all done. Congressman Dingell, do you think today's release 
of the thousands of pages of documents serves the public interest 
or not? Well, I don't find any particular joy in watching this kind 
of nastiness either on TV or having to read it over, which unfortunately 
I'm having to do. But I want to comment on another point. We've had 
two special prosecutors who have spent something on the order of $60 
million looking this and other matters. We've had committees in the 
house and Senate looking into this matter, and they've spent millions 
of dollars. I think we know what the facts are and should get down 
to arriving at the necessary judgment. Let's find out on the basis 
of the facts which Mr. Starr has shown on the basis of his report. 
Let's be find out what impeachable offenses are and let's proceed 
to address the matter with all speed and vigor. In your use of the 
phrase arriving at the necessary judgment, you can see how members 
on the other side of the aisle would say this is very serious, this 
man used this office to fight what he knew to be true, and a whole 
lot of other things. And this was going on in the public house right 
under the ides of all. Let me remind you, first of all, I said that 
this should be an open process. Second, I've said the president's 
behavior was wrong and so has the president. I think the question 
before us is are these impeachable offenses? And I think we're going 
to have to define that. Those who want to impeach the president are 
going to have to establish first of all what is an impeachable offense. 
Second, they're going to have to establish whether he did it. The 
facts seem to be out. Now we're going to have to get down to a judgment 
of what meets the definition of impeachable offense so we can conclude 
this sorry matter in as rapid a manner as possible and then get down 
to the serious business. Could I comment on that? I think what we 
are doing there is getting the cart before the horse. The facts aren't 
out yet. We still haven't got the president to say exactly what happened 
out there. We've just got one side through the independent counsel. 
And so far the facts that we've heard indicate that this second phase 
is necessary. Now, what we're trying to use is the model established 
black in 1974 in the Nixon hearings under chairman rodino and congressman 
Dingell was there at the time, where we first establish all the facts, 
not just a few of the facts. And then we put all the facts in the 
context of too and this presidency and then we decide what an impeachable 
offense is. Who are you going to look to for guidance? Obviously a 
few constitutional scholars, but what weighs more heavily, how the 
American people speak in the congressional elections in November or 
what your constituents say to you next time you're out at a picnic? 
We have to in the end do what's right under the constitution. When 
our forefathers wrote the constitution they didn't talk about polls 
and focus groups, they talked about high crimes and misdemeanors. 
That's our job to decide. The chairman of the subcommittee on Judiciary 
is going to hold hearings with distinguished people coming in who 
are experts and we certainly want to accept their views. What are 
the people of the great state of Michigan telling you? That they're 
fed up with the whole sorry mess, they want it disposed of. They are 
stating to me that they think the president is doing a good job, that 
they don't want him impeached. When we went through Watergate, there 
was no special prosecutor. We have had now some $60 million to $100 
million spent on special prosecutors to find out what the facts are. 
The facts are well known. The president was also deposed on tape, 
in which he described what he did and said he did wrong. I think we 
have about enough facts to get to the serious business of making a 
judgment whether this constitutes an impeachable offense so we can 
get down to doing the other things that are that are important to 
the American ople. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>