<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981002.2100.1761 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we've been talking about since the top of the broadcast, on Monday 
a process begins in the House of Representatives that could result 
in the formal start of impeachment proceedings against the president. 
Even though the democrats, the minority here are saying they have 
an alternate plan, get it all out by November 25, there's other another 
date people are watching, the upcoming elections. Beyond which, they 
say, it's anyone's guess. We have a look at how politics might affect 
this process from Joe Johns. The last mass document release is now 
out of the way, but the bickering continues. You have to conclude 
it's partisan politics. We're just hearing double-talk out of them. 
Democrats and republicans say they want politics out of the process 
when the house Judiciary committee starts considering the allegations 
against the president but that's almost impossible with the midterm 
elections just weeks away. An election that could change the makeup 
of the Congress and the will to proceed. 1/3 of the seats in the Senate 
and all the seats in the house are in play except for incumbents running 
unopposed. In the house, republicans have a narrow margin of control. 
Democrats have 206 seats. There is one independent. If republicans 
voted along party lines in a vote held today, impeachment proceedings 
against the president would ton. But in the Senate, republicans hold 
55 seats, democrats 45. Here, a 2/3 majority is required to convict 
an impeached president. The republicans won have enough votes. Both 
parties have a chance to change the equation and some polls show the 
G.O.P. has momentum. I think clearly republican strategists think 
we have a greater opportunity to gain seats. But pollsters warn republicans 
against overplaying their hand. It's a double-edged sword. You might 
energize your base but at the risk of turning off people in the middle. 
Neither side is sure of anything right now but they are watching so-called 
bellwether races for indicators. Among those, senator Al D'Amato's 
bid for re-election against democrat Charles Schumer. D'Amato conducted 
a high-profile investigation of the Whitewater wirt controversy, Schumer 
is a member of the house Judiciary committee. Another crace to watch 
-- incumbent California democrat Barbara boxer is trying to get re-elected 
against Matt fong. Whatever the outcome, some members of both parties 
fear the process will suffer. Congress wam Zoe love gren was a congressional 
staffer during Watergate. I think the worst case scenario would be 
if members of the both parties put the election ahead of the country 
and calculated their moves for November 3 instead of the year 2030. 
And one of the first republicans to call for an impeachment inquiry 
agrees. Frankly, I don't pay any attention at all to what effect this 
may or may not have on the short-term elections. That is irrelevant. 
If republicans pay attention to that, they're being irresponsible. 
Polls show most Americans still want the scandal to go away. Joe Johns, 
NBC news, the capital. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>