<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981002.2100.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chip Reid has been reading through the latest round of documents saul 
day, almost 5,000 pagse pages in all. Chip, go ahead. Brian, some 
of the more interesting things, no surprise here, were conversations 
involving Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp, those taped conversations. 
Now, Gwen Ifill just mentioned that Vernon Jordan had defined sexual 
relations as requiring intercors, and we know the president felt that 
way too. Well, Monica also believed that definition of sexual relations. 
If it was just oral sex, that wasn't sexual relations. Here is a conversation 
from October 23,1997. Him, of course, being the president, who has 
that same definition of sex or sexual relations. Lewinsky and Tripp 
also spent a lotting time with Lewinsky agoinizing over the relationship, 
loved him, hated him, back and forth, and how she got mixed up in 
this in the first place. So apparently she felt she was serving the 
country in some form in this relationship. Another rather striking 
or perhaps even strange little conversation between Monica Lewinsky 
and Linda Tripp, after she had gone through one of her I hate him, 
I hate him phases, she said " -- Trip says I proums, if you get out 
of this one alive and unharmed and sane and healthy, I tell you what, 
more and more the New York thing just seems right. In other words, 
get out of town, get a job in New York and that at that point is exactly 
what she was trying to do. And Betty Currie, a beloved figure in the 
White House west wing, honest, intensely religious, paintsed throughout 
as a benign observer, but now increasingly to use a 1990's term, the 
enabler of a relationship, what is in here that speaks to that? A 
lot. She really was very central to this all the way through, setting 
up the gifts, the meetings with the president. Some people felt in 
the White House, the meanies as Monica Lewinsky called them, that 
their way of serving the president was to keep her away from the president. 
Betty Currie evidently felt her job was to do whatever the president 
wanted her to do. If he called her at home, and he did at 2:00 in 
the morning one night, she was there to serve him and she did what 
the president wanted even though she had a gut feeling that they might 
have been having something more than just the kind of relationship 
he should have been having but she claims she never knew they were 
having the kind of relationship they ultimately were having. But she's 
very central to this and some believe she could be -- could be in 
some legal jeopardy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>