<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981002.2100.1991 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Remember with all this talk of hearings in the house that there has 
already been an investigation here. A lot of people are asking what 
could hearings possibly uncover that Ken Starr hasn't already? You're 
going to hear a lot of republicans continue to say the hearings should 
be Watergate style. With that in mind we thought we would talk to 
a gentleman tonight who has been there and done that. 25 years ago 
tonight, our guest Richard Ben-veniste was chief counsel in the Watergate 
hearings. I bet it's hard to, every time you hear that 25 years ago, 
you have to pinch yourself to believe it. Is this going to be such 
a straight up and down party vote that the White House might as well 
take a roll on this and hope for fairness in the house? I don't think 
so. I think there is hope that the leadership on both sides will recognize 
that the interests of the nation require us to puts the horse before 
the cart. That is, we've got to look at what an impeachable offense 
is. In Watergate 25 years ago, republicans and democrats did that 
together. And in that sense I think the needle on the hypocrisisy 
meter has gone off the charts to some extent here. If you look back 
at what the articles of impeachment which were considered during Watergate 
were, you would hear that one of the charges against Mr. Nixon was 
tax evasion, a serious felony. And yet although evidence was very 
compelling that the president had back-dated documents in order to 
take advantage of a very substantial tax deduction, that he had committed 
tax fraud, it was determined that because that was fundamentally personal 
in nature, did not involve the misuse of his office as president, 
that this would not be an appropriate article of impeachment, and 
it was voted down even though the democrats were in the majority at 
that point. You've read the federalist papers and you've certainly 
read the constitution. We had professor tribe from Harvard on this 
week and we've talked about this with virtually every guest of a legal 
bent we've had on this broadcast. Where is it? Where is the high crime 
here that can be put into modern terms? The constitution has grown 
with the times. Where's it going to be found? It isn't. That's the 
problem. That's the problem that's faced with this dump of more information 
than anybody ever wanted to know about this matter. In all of this 
we don't have the misuse of the office of the presidency that the 
framers of the constitution and everyone who has considered this issue 
before points to. Even in the Andrew Johnson impeachment, in the aftermath 
of the civil war, it was not criminality that was at issue, it was 
whether President Johnson, in rejecting and trying to thwart some 
of the more radical propositions for reconstruction, after the war 
and trying to heal the country, he thwarted the will of Congress, 
which was then controlled by what were known as radical republicans 
who wanted to really conquer the south and make the south pay for 
the war. Instead, Johnson's position was one of more moderation. And 
yet at this point it was considered that Johnson, in violating some 
of the statutes passed by Congress, had committed an impeachable offense. 
Even there it was the misuse of the office of the presidency that 
was key to the impeachment proceedings. In your view, though, we don't 
have the threshold in this case, but what we do have and what no one 
disputes is we have wrongdoing and not only that, just plain Gross 
behavior. Perhaps the first president in the history of the republic 
that parents actively don't want their children learning about right 
now. So what do we do about that? I think what we do is have a punishment 
which is proportionate to the offense. And I think in this regard 
the American public in its great common sense is way ahead of the 
pundits and indeed ahead of the republican majority in what it approves 
of and thinks is the appropriate course of action. This president 
is popularly elected, twice. His official posture is one which gains 
great approval not only here but in foreign countries. And his reckless 
personal behavior which no one can approve of and indeed which the 
president has apologized for and has recognized as improper, has only 
given Mr. Starr the opportunity at the end of four years of a failed 
investigation, having spent $50 million, the opportunity to show improprite 
but not illegality, and nothing, in my view, that rises to the level 
of the abuse of power that is inherent in the impeachment clause in 
the constitution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>