<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981002.2100.2471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight an early look at tomorrow morning's "New York Times" and say 
tale of two districts, two congressional districts, that is, in separate 
states a few hundred miles apart that might just tale the tale of 
whags what's at stake in the upcoming elections. The results might 
help decide White House strategy here. Rick Berke will be the by-line 
in the morning. He is with us with a preview. Why don't you describe 
the districts? I tried to get outside the Beltway because we're accused 
too much of being insiders here. I went to two districts, one in Indianapolis 
and one in Raleigh-Durham, North Carolina. Indianapolis is Julia car 
sornings a first-term democrat, a pretty liberal democrat. The one 
in North Carolina, David price, a veteran congressman, moderate. And 
you would think thear much different candidates but both share the 
same problem, which is that they're both in tougher races than anyone 
feared earlier in the year. Their advisors fear the Clinton business 
is what's causing them some heartache five weeks before the election. 
Can we use the favorite term of journalists, bellwether? I'm wary 
of saying bellwether, but these are two examples of districts, and 
there are several around the country where democrats are saying we 
didn't expect competitive races and are seeing them now. So it does 
show something. What's interesting about these two races is both candidates 
are still favored to win but they are as nervous as you and I are 
about this unsettled nature of the campaigns this year. No one, not 
even these candidates on the ground seem to have a good sense of what's 
going to happen. On the one hand, the candidates are nervous, taking 
extra steps to get out the vote, get their bases out to the polls 
and so forth. Yet on the other hand, there is conflicting evidence. 
When I went around with both candidates as well as their republican 
rivals, no one brought up um the White House scandal. So who knows 
what's going to happen? And of course it has seemed throughout U.S. 
history that in off-year elections when a president has needed a little 
hammering, he has gotten hallered -- MA'am hammered. But that would 
require us to believe a lot of things, including individual volters 
going in and picking someone that they also intend to to be a message 
to the White House. Is that too much to believe? It may be. I said 
to some, are you angry at Clinton for what he did? They said yes. 
And I said will it affect how you vote in five weeks? They said how 
I feel about Clinton is going to affect how I vote for my local congressman? 
The answer is no. Yet there is other evidence that the democratic 
income bents are very worried. I got the same response from congressman 
Carson and price when I asked, would you like Clinton to come and 
campaign for you in your district? They both said, well, it's too 
late to get him on our schedule. I said let's pretend, and then they 
kind of squirmed in their seats and then they said -- congressman 
price said no, I've never had a president campaign for me, and this 
year wouldn't be the year to start. Julia Carson said I don't think 
it will hurt me, but she certainly didn't say it would help me. There's 
coattails for you. Rick Berke's piece will appear tomorrow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>