<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981002.2100.3281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mike McCurry packed his boxes and moved out of the west wing office 
today after almost four years as White House press secretary. He brought 
an original style to the job that is among the toughest jobs in all 
of Washington. He used humor to defuse, intentional ignorance to avoid 
lying. Tonight we have put together a compilation of some of his time. 
All right. let's go. This is the official briefing of the White House. 
My name is Mike McCurry. I stand here regularly, five days a week 
to be pummeled to death the welcome, ladies and gentlemen, to theater 
of the absurd. We do this five days a week, believe it or not. I'm 
briefing today as an anonymous source. This is the senior White House 
official who is so helpful to so many of up all the time. Have you 
yourself been subpoenaed? I have not. Hey, I gave a definitive answer 
to a question. yes! But that's one we'll ask every day. Stand by. 
Most of the time I feel I'm double parked in a no comment zone. This 
just in -- the general services administration have assured the White 
House staff they have put out the necessary traps to capture the remaining 
rat here in the press briefing room. I know the feeling. Mr. Blum? 
Don't go there, Mike. Right? 27 days and counting. I'm a short-timer, 
what do I care? This is not live, is it? Good afternoon, ladies and 
gentlemen, welcome to today's White House briefing. I'm not going 
to speculate on matters that are still under investigation. I'm not 
going to speculate on the answer to that question. I'm not going to 
parse the statement. It speaks for itself. I'm not going to speculate 
on that or anything related to the specifics. I refer you to my transcript 
yesterday which referred to my transcript of the day B I'm not going 
to speculate on that. I'm not going to speculate on that. I've said 
all I'm going to say on that subject today. The first commandment 
of all press secretaries since Watergate and Vietnam,000 shalt not 
lie. Any breach of that is near fatal personally but I think also 
would ultimately do great damage to the presidency, to this particular 
president and to the structure of this adversarial relationship which 
is at a very delicate point at this moment. Second,000 shalt not spin. 
And my last rule, which has always been the one that serves me best, 
try to keep some sense of humor because in the midst of what might 
seem God awful, it is best to be able to maintain perspective and 
be able to laugh at yourself. My office is perfectly situated as a 
geographical metaphor here in the White House -- 50 feet away in one 
direction is the oval office, 50 feet in the other, this room where 
we're dealing with you. Whatever you think about his borks a lot of 
people wirk a fond farewell to Mike McCurry after his detart ure tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>