<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981002.1830.0255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the same time today, the house Judiciary committee made public 
thousands of additional pages of testimony and transcripts from the 
Ken Starr investigation. It plans to take up the question of impeachment 
beginning next week. And, as we'll hear in these two reports, the 
latest documents provide a little something for everyone -- including 
a new claim from the White House that Ken Starr is only out to get 
the president. We begin with NBC's Lisa Myers. The 20 hours of taped 
conversations and thousands of pages of documents, all rich in detail, 
reveal that Lewinsky and her mother both feared as her relationship 
with the president was in danger of becoming known. Some of the most 
dramatic exchanges came as Lewinsky lunched with Linda Tripp at this 
Virginia hotel, not knowing her friend had been wired at Kenneth Starr's 
request by the FBI. An at-times-tearful Lewinsky tells Tripp. "I would 
not cross these people for fear and Lewinsky repeatedly urges Tripp 
to lie, too -- warns she could lose her government job if she crosses 
the president. Even coaches her on the fine art of lying under oath 
-- in this conversation, Monica also tells Tripp the president told 
her to lie. Lewinsky has since testify Thad was not true, that the 
president never told her to lie. Tripp's response -- that Monica is 
lying now to protect the president from more serious legal charges. 
Most of the tapes involve much more personal matters and reveal a 
sometimes tumultuous relationship between the two women. You realize 
that you're not dealing with just characters out of a novel somewhere, 
but very human people. And that's what makes all this very difficult. 
Because it certainly dramatically impacts everyone's lives. Monica 
tells Linda she reminds her of her mother, the only person on earth 
Monica trusts. Linda tries to build up Monica's self-esteem, even 
as she secretly tapes conversations and seeks information damages 
to the president. The White House charged that Starr's report failed 
to include critical facts about Tripp. Miss Tripp's repeated ef fors 
to encourage behavior that they suggest is central to the president 
raises disturbing questions about her role in this entire affair. 
Lewinsky often refers to the president as the creep. Calls him, quote, 
the biggest little liar I ever met but says she can't get him out 
of her heart. Lisa Myers, NBC news, Washington. This is Gwen Ifill 
on Capitol Hill. The new evidence released today reveals a president 
intent on keeping secrets -- from his wife, his White House advisers, 
his closest friends. But the details also show the Lewinsky relationship 
was an open secret on the White House grounds, where one secret service 
agent testified he bet another officer on how fast the president would 
beat a path to the oval office to see the woman he described as "the 
president's mistress." But the president's closest advisers purposely 
looked the other way. In his grand jury testimony, Washington superlawyer 
Vernon Jordan says he refused he says he didn't want Monica Lewinsky 
to tell me anything about her relationship with the president. But 
he said he agrees with the president that sexual relations means sexual 
intercourse only -- a key part of Mr. Clinton's defense against perjury. 
And Jordan flatly denies he helped Lewinsky get a job in exchange 
for her silence. His testimony -- "absolutely, unequivocally, indubitably 
no." Presidential secretary Betty Currie, the go-between for the president 
and the former intern, says she had a "gut feeling" that Lewinsky's 
"very serious crush on the president" had gone too far. But, after 
the story breaks, it is Currie who retrieves the president's gifts 
to Lewinsky. But the closest person to the president, the first lady, 
apparently suspected nothing. Clinton adviser Sidney Blumenthal testified 
Hillary Clinton thought her husband's connection to Lewinsky involved 
only "ministry of a troubled person." For lawmakers on Capitol Hill, 
the new details changed few minds. I don't think there is any choice 
but that you should vote to continue this inquiry. If the president 
were to be impeached, we could have 20 years of recriminations. "You 
staged a coup D'etat, you overturned an election unfairly." Monday, 
the house Judiciary committee meets to consider impeachment hearings. 
Democrats say Lesser punishment is in order, but republicans seem 
to be in no mood to listen. Gwen Ifill, NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>