<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gene Autry, America's first singing cowboy of the movies and a multimillionaire 
businessman, died Friday at his home in the Studio City neighborhood 
of Los Angeles, said Karla Buhlman, vice president of Gene Autry Entertainment. 
He was 91. With his theme song, ``Back in the Saddle Again,'' and 
riding his chestnut stallion, Champion, Autry began his climb to fame 
in the mid-1930s. Although he later owned hotels, broadcasting stations, 
oil wells and a baseball team, he did not give up performing in films, 
on radio and television or in his own rodeo until 1964. His biggest 
recording hit, ``Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer,'' released in 1949, 
remains a children's Christmas favorite. It has sold an estimated 
15 million copies and is the second best-selling single in history, 
runner-up to Bing Crosby's ``White Christmas.'' He was also a prolific 
songwriter, turning out some 300 tunes, including ``Here Comes Santa 
Claus.'' ``That Silver-Haired Daddy of Mine,'' another original, was 
his first recording, a hit that sold more than a million copies in 
less than a year. Autry's career as a businessman went back to his 
movie days when he began making money franchising his name and face 
for sweatshirts, jeans, belts, suspenders, gloves, lassos and souvenirs. 
By 1940, Gene Autry cap pistols dominated the toy gun industry. But 
it was not until 1948, when he bought a radio station in Phoenix, 
that he laid the cornerstone of a financial empire that included 10 
radio stations and a Los Angeles television station, a flying school, 
a music-publishing company, a 20,000-acre cattle ranch in Arizona 
and ownership of the California Angels baseball team in 1961. In addition, 
Autry owned the Gene Autry Hotel in Palm Springs, Calif., and controlled 
corporations that at times operated a half-dozen other hotels, including 
the St. Francis in San Francisco. He was also a partner in many Oklahoma 
and Texas oil well operations. Autry, who continued to wear Western 
boots and clothes long after his retirement from show business, came 
by his cowboy image honestly. Orvon Gene Autry was born on Sept. 29, 
1907, on a small cattle and grain farm in Tioga, Texas. He was the 
son of a cattle buyer, tenant farmer and nondenominational itinerant 
preacher. The boy's mother died when he was 4 years old, not long 
after the family had moved to Ravia, Okla., where the young Autry 
learned to ride horses and play the guitar and sing at his father's 
church services. At the age of 16 he went to work as a baggage handler 
at the Ravia railroad depot, where he learned telegraphy from the 
station master. Later he was a vacation relief telegrapher for the 
Frisco Railroad at stops from St. Louis to southern Oklahoma, an experience 
that he said was to ``change my life forever.'' One night in Chelsea, 
Okla., when he was 17, he said, ``This farmer-looking guy, with glasses 
on the tip of his nose, came into the office and gave me some pages 
to send.'' ``Then he spotted the guitar,'' Autry said. `` `You play 
that?' he asked. `Like to hear you.''' The man Autry dutifully played 
for turned out to be Will Rogers, and he told the young man that he 
had a future on the radio. Thus encouraged, in 1927 Autry used his 
railroad pass to visit New York, where he spent a month knocking on 
the doors of radio stations and record companies. He was advised to 
get radio experience elsewhere, and shortly afterward got a job as 
Oklahoma's Yodeling Cowboy on station KVOO in Tulsa. In 1928, Autry 
returned to New York to record ``Silver-Haired Daddy,'' written with 
Jimmy Long, a fellow railroad worker, whose niece, Ina Mae Spivey, 
he was to marry in 1932. The success of the recording won Autry a 
Columbia Records contract and a weekly role on the popular National 
Barn Dance radio show broadcast from Chicago. The Autrys moved to 
Hollywood in 1934. He was given a small role in a Ken Maynard western, 
``In Old Santa Fe,'' and sang only one song, but the idea of a singing 
cowboy hero caught on with producers at Republic Pictures, which specialized 
in low-budget westerns and serials. In 1935, Autry, beginning with 
``Tumbling Tumbleweeds,'' his first starring role, made eight hourlong 
movies for the Saturday afternoon ``kiddie trade.'' In the years to 
come he appeared in dozens more, and he became the only western star 
to be listed by moviehouse owners as among the top 10 money makers 
in the Hollywood films of 1938 to 1942. In such movies as ``Boots 
and Saddles,'' ``South of the Border,'' ``Melody Ranch'' and ``Down 
Mexico Way,'' Autry was a no-nonsense hero in stories that conformed 
to his own cowboy's code: ``The hero must not take unfair advantage 
of anyone, including the bad guys. He must not hit anybody smaller 
than himself. He must always keep his word. He must not smoke or drink 
in public, and he must not kiss the girl.'' His well-trained Tennessee 
walking horse Champion, which figured prominently in most Autry movies, 
had its own stand-in. The famous horse was replaced through the years 
with two others from the same strain from the same breeder near Nashville. 
In movies and the traveling Autry rodeo show, Champion was billed 
as the ``World's Wonder Horse.'' Smiley Burnett was popular as Autry's 
comic sidekick. Autry, whose songs, performed in a pleasant tenor 
voice, irked some of his younger viewers who preferred nonstop action, 
had millions of female fans who wrote 5,000 letters a week to him. 
But he was modest about his talents, telling an interviewer in 1980: 
``I honestly never considered myself an actor. An actor would be someone 
like Paul Muni or Spencer Tracy. I was more of a personality.'' By 
1942, when he enlisted in the Army Air Forces, Autry was grossing 
more than $600,000 a year from movies, records, a weekly radio show 
and personal appearances. Having learned to fly years earlier, he 
spent the war ferrying cargo in the Far East and was discharged in 
1945. The only concession the Air Forces made to Sergeant Autry's 
fame was to allow him to wear his cowboy boots with his uniform. During 
his wartime absence, Republic Pictures had promoted Roy Rogers as 
King of the Cowboys, so Autry did not return to his old studio, preferring 
to form his own Flying A Productions as a unit at Columbia Pictures. 
After the war, he took on a new partner, Pat Buttram, as well. Flying 
A made his movies from then on and in the 1950s filmed 91 half-hour 
episodes of ``The Gene Autry Show'' for CBS and a new generation of 
American youngsters. The highly lucrative Autry company also produced 
``Annie Oakley,'' ``Death Valley Days'' and other television series. 
Autry credited his wife, Ina Mae, with inducing him to make one of 
his shrewdest decisions. He had received a catchy song in the mail 
in 1949 but was reluctant to record it. Mrs. Autry, however, told 
her husband: ``It reminds me of `The Ugly Duckling.' Kids will love 
it.'' At a recording session in Los Angeles, he suddenly decided to 
include the song, ``Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer,'' and performed 
it in a single take. His personal earnings from that single recording 
came to more than $1 million. Autry had no children. His first wife, 
Ina Mae, died in 1980, and the next year he married Jacqueline Ellam. 
She was a 39-year-old friend of 15 years who was a vice president 
of a bank in Cathedral City, Calif., near Palm Springs, where Autry 
had a home. If Autry was shrewd in his entertainment career, he had 
a Midas touch in business. In 1982, for example, he sold television 
station KTLA in Los Angeles for $245 million. Even while still playing 
Madison Square Garden in New York and other cities with his own rodeo 
shows, he was making deals for oil wells, hotels, radio and television 
stations and other properties. He was on the telephone constantly, 
keeping in touch with his far-flung interests, but he was admired 
for his ability to delegate authority. Autry was a longtime collector 
of Western memorabilia and art, and in December 1988, the Gene Autry 
Western Heritage Museum, built largely with funds from Autry's foundations, 
opened in Griffith Park in Los Angeles. ``I felt that I owed something,'' 
Autry said. ``The West has been very kind to me over the years.'' 
Among the items in the $54 million museum are an 1870s-era steam fire 
engine from Nevada, guns owned by Annie Oakley and Wyatt Earp and 
costumes of the Lone Ranger and Tonto. As owner of the California 
Angels, now the Anaheim Angels, Autry, who had been a baseball fan 
since childhood, was fiercely competitive. He spent lavishly, offering 
multi-million-dollar contracts to attract star players to his team. 
In 1979 his costly lineup of stars won Autry and the Angels their 
first divisional championship. Known affectionately as the Cowboy 
in baseball circles, Autry was one of the most popular owners among 
players on his own and other teams. In 1995, Autry announced that 
the Walt Disney Co. was buying a part interest in the team, and the 
next year Disney took operating control. Recent baseball seasons ended 
as all seasons have ended for the Angels, with Autry still awaiting 
the team's first World Series appearance. Disney had an agreement 
to acquire Autry's remaining share of the team at his death. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>