<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
(italics)``When we examine banks, we expect them to have systems in 
place that take account of outsized market moves.'' _ Alan Greenspan, 
chairman of the Federal Reserve, in congressional testimony on Thursday(end 
italics) Ever play blackjack at your local casino? Then the name Edward 
O. Thorp might be familiar. Thorp introduced blackjack fans to counting 
cards in his 1962 best seller ``Beat the Dealer,'' which gave gamblers 
an invaluable tool for trying to beat the house. Ever wonder where 
hedge funds come from? An accomplished mathematician, Thorp started 
one of the first and most successful hedge funds, now called Edward 
O. Thorp &AMP; Associates, in 1969. And he has few kind words for 
the Wall Street professionals and Nobel laureates who helped bring 
Long-Term Capital Management, the giant hedge fund in Greenwich, Conn., 
to its knees. Thorp said he was invited to invest in Long-Term Capital 
when it was started in 1994, but he declined. ``I didn't want to have 
anything to do with it because I knew these guys were just dice-rollers,'' 
he said. ``I didn't really see where these guys had an advantage they 
could exploit.'' Many people on Wall Street clearly thought otherwise. 
Over the last four years, Long-Term Capital attracted money from some 
of the world's savviest investors, and made a lot of money for them 
during most of that period _ the salad days of the 1990s bull market. 
But hedge funds are supposed to perform well even when markets hit 
rough patches, as they have lately. And it is not clear whether the 
firm's fans had ever scrutinized Long-Term Capital's investment strategy 
with hard times in mind. ``It was just a mutual admiration society 
at Long-Term,'' Thorp said, ``and nobody was focusing clearly enough 
on the model.'' Aha. The model. Nowhere, except perhaps within the 
walls of the Pentagon, the White House's Situation Room or the National 
Weather Service, does ``the model'' hold as much sway as it does on 
Wall Street. Some of the most profitable trading on Wall Street, especially 
within hedge funds, involves complex, innovative products known as 
derivatives. Derivatives are financial hybrids born in the guts of 
a computer and intended to protect users from disadvantageous economic 
shifts like currency devaluations or interest-rate increases. In short, 
each derivative, its value ``derived'' from an underlying asset like 
a stock, bond or currency, is a little model. And financial models 
are only as good as their makers. ``The issue of relying on computer 
models to do risk analysis is something we need to look at seriously,'' 
said Charles Peabody, a banking analyst with Mitchell Securities Inc. 
in New York. ``They only model for whatever humans put into them. 
Are people putting in data that reflect the possibility of the financial 
equivalent of a nuclear meltdown? Usually not. And then they rely 
on computer models as if they're the word of God.'' Wall Street's 
fascination with computer models began in the 1960s, when Thorp and 
others set up the first hedge funds. Such funds, open only to wealthy 
investors, used computer-aided research to uncover price discrepancies 
between related securities. Those discrepancies could be profitably 
exploited in such a way that investors had protection, or a hedge, 
against big losses. In 1973, when three gifted researchers _ Fischer 
Black, Myron S. Scholes and Robert C. Merton _ introduced the first 
formula for accurately pricing options, the heady quantitative world 
of finance took another big step forward. By correlating interest 
rates, prices, volatility and time, the Nobel Prize-winning Black-Scholes 
model tried, as would an insurance policy, to put a price tag on uncertainty. 
Models had arrived. The advent of the personal computer in the 1980s 
gave rise to Wall Street's young ``rocket scientists,'' schooled and 
confident in the predictive capacities of computer models. Next to 
investment banking, trading through computer models became the hippest 
and most lucrative thing to do on Wall Street. Large commercial and 
investment banks like Bankers Trust, Citicorp, Chase Manhattan, Goldman, 
Sachs, J.P. Morgan, Merrill Lynch and Salomon Smith Barney are among 
the world's most avid devotees of derivatives, and maintain in-house 
systems for modeling risk. But those models have often proven flawed. 
For example, Switzerland's UBS, Europe's largest bank, on Friday attributed 
its $696 million loss in Long-Term in part to ``shortcomings in risk 
management processes.'' Indeed, a series of unexpected financial shocks 
_ the interest rate increases of 1994, the devaluation of the Thai 
baht in 1997 and the Russian ruble this year and the odd movement 
of bond prices over the last month _ have shown that models endow 
their users with only a modicum of control over their financial destiny. 
``We keep preaching how important stress-testing is,'' said Leslie 
Rahl, a principal with Capital Markets Risk Advisers, a New York consulting 
firm that specializes in derivatives. ``The kinds of financial problems 
we have had are in very subtle areas, and people aren't looking for 
these kinds of unusual events when they stress-test.'' Long-Term Capital's 
reputation for savvy was considerably enhanced by the presence of 
Scholes and Merton, who are partners in the firm. But bankers who 
have belatedly examined its risk models said they were outmoded, compared 
with others now in vogue on Wall Street. Moreover, Long-Term Capital's 
model certainly did not take into account the unprecedented recent 
movements in the bond market. With bond losses mounting, Long-Term 
Capital's partners apparently hoped to recover by speculating on takeover 
plays in the stock market. Of course, what Wall Street calls speculating, 
the rest of the world calls gambling, and most gamblers end up ruined. 
Still, Long-Term Capital was able to borrow mightily to make its wagers. 
Analysts and some investors said the collapse of Long-Term Capital 
should focus attention on the shortcomings of computer forecasting 
_ and the quality of unregulated, privately negotiated contracts _ 
that lie at the heart of the brave new world of modern finance. ``The 
banking and regulatory authorities were not paying attention to the 
amount of leverage these guys were taking on, and they should have 
been,'' Thorp said. In the end, Long-Term Capital's brush with ruin 
has provoked so much hand-wringing because the global financial system 
is built on a framework of mathematical models. As such, the system 
is fated to tremble from the strains of ever faster and more immense 
movements of money directed by the inexact intuitions of gamblers 
_ just the kinds of random stresses that the models cannot predict. 
When, instead of just trembling, the financial system threatens to 
come unglued, model or no model, mere worries turn to migraines. And 
fast action is demanded: monetary policy shifts, IMF bailouts, or 
in the latest case, the Federal Reserve's roping of Wall Street's 
biggest houses into engineering the rescue of Long-Term Capital. Then 
the models can settle down again, ripe for a blindsiding by the next 
bolt from the blue. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>