<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0278 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Where do you go to find a visionary in the television business? One 
place to look, according to Wall Street analysts, is a spare cubicle 
in a bunker-like building in a neighborhood of aging, weather-beaten, 
frame rowhouses in Baltimore. From that unlikely nexis of power and 
prestige, David D. Smith, chief executive of the Sinclair Broadcast 
Group, runs a group of TV stations that has grown so fast he is unsure 
exactly how many he now controls. ``I think it's either 61 or 63,'' 
Smith said. It's actually 64, enough to put Smith in the same league 
as Babe Ruth and Roger Maris, if not quite Mark McGwire and Sammy 
Sosa. It also gives Sinclair control of more stations than any of 
the major broadcast networks _ by one measure, greater reach into 
the nation's households than the stations owned by one of the giants, 
ABC. More important, the spending power represented by those stations 
is giving Smith and his ideas influence in an industry that has long 
seen local television as the seedy but rich uncle of the television 
business _ a salesman in garish clothes and diamond pinkie rings. 
Now, however, station group owners like Smith may have more say about 
what American television viewers watch in the future than the media 
elite on Broadcast Row in Manhattan. Already, local stations control 
so much of the revenue generated by the television business _ more 
than $20 billion a year, versus the $14 billion produced by the networks 
_ that more network programming decisions are being made on the basis 
of what works best for local stations, not national ratings. CBS, 
for instance, has shifted its programming priorities to attract more 
urban than rural viewers, specifically to try to benefit the stations 
it owns, most of which are in the nation's biggest cities. One example: 
This season, CBS canceled ``Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman,'' a Western, 
in favor of ``Martial Law,'' a series about a martial-arts expert 
in Los Angeles. Indeed, almost all the new programming in recent years 
on every network _ including the two would-be networks, UPN and the 
WB _ has been aimed at young urban viewers. At one point, the entire 
NBC lineup of Thursday-night comedies was set in Manhattan. The Fox 
network is so committed to maintaining profits at the stations it 
owns that it has resisted expanding beyond 15 hours in prime time; 
the other networks fill 22 hours. ``You have to consider the network 
as wholesale and the local stations as retail,'' said Fox Television 
president Larry Jacobson. ``The growth is really in retail sales. 
That's why we're staying at 15 hours, to allow the stations to be 
more profitable.'' So what's the vision in all this? In Smith's view, 
it is leading to a television world ruled by 10 to 15 enormous station 
groups like Sinclair that will hold sway over what programs get on 
the air. And when the day comes that digital technology takes hold, 
Smith envisions his company dividing each of his local broadcast signals 
into five or six different channels _ including some that viewers 
would have to pay for _ rather than transmitting high-definition pictures 
on a single frequency. For good measure, Smith also intends to dominate 
the business of providing local Internet content in each of his markets. 
The first step in this process would be to make Sinclair even bigger, 
if the government allows companies' reach to extend beyond the current 
limits _ 35 percent of the nation's households. In the last two weeks, 
many of the big station group owners have been calling for relaxation 
of the 35 percent limitation. CBS station group chairman Mel Karmazin 
told a Federal Communications Commission panel Thursday that ``the 
35 percent cap has to move and it's got to move quickly.'' Under the 
present limitations, the big TV networks are struggling to reach single-digit 
profit margins. Smith, meanwhile, is upbeat about Sinclair's prospects 
_ even under the current restrictions. ``This is absolutely a great 
business,'' he said. ``I don't think there are many other businesses 
where you can do a 50 percent profit margin without manufacturing 
anything. And I know. I tried manufacturing high-powered antennas, 
and I had to fight and die for a couple of percent profit.'' Even 
underperforming TV stations often manage to hit 30 to 35 percent profit 
margins. Stations also continue to be sold at extravagant prices. 
Just last August the Hearst-Argyle station group bought an NBC affiliate 
in Sacramento, Calif., for $520 million. That price is about 15 times 
the station's annual profit, one of the highest multiples ever paid 
for a television station. (The cost of acquisitions means the profits 
Smith brags about are on an operating basis only. Over all, Sinclair 
has lost money three of the last five years, and its stock has badly 
lagged behind the bull market _ up about 30 percent since the company 
went public in June 1995, versus an 80 percent gain in the Standard 
&AMP; Poor's 500-stock index. But revenues have climbed steadily, 
increasing sixfold from 1993 to 1997.) Most network executives share 
Smith's bullishness about the local station business. CBS has such 
high hopes for economic gains at its stations that executives have 
taken to shrugging off likely losses at the network level. After all, 
the company is now being run by Karmazin, who gained fame in the last 
decade at Infinity Broadcasting for assembling an enormous number 
of radio stations and then bolstering their sales and profitability 
with his tough approach to management. Some experts say local stations 
are bound to be hurt by a range of competitive incursions _ foremost, 
perhaps, the sale of local advertising by cable companies. But Jonathan 
Klein, the president of CBS's stations, dismisses the threat. ``No 
cable station is going to have 40 years invested in Pittsburgh, the 
way our station, KDKA, has,'' he said. But with the media industry 
roiled by change in the last decade, some executives believe that 
local television will prove vulnerable: to what some see as an inevitable 
conflict over the issue of payments that the stations receive for 
carrying network programs, or to the same pressures of increasing 
viewer choice that have squeezed the economics of network television, 
or to a downturn in the national economy that will affect advertising 
sales, still the only real source of revenues for local broadcasters 
beyond those annual checks from the networks. ``Local television is 
still a great business, but I think there are concerns about the age-old 
issue of audience erosion,'' said Paul Sweeney, a media analyst for 
Salomon Smith Barney. ``That sets up the classic squeeze on profits. 
Costs are rising faster than revenues, even though the squeeze is 
still less apparent at the local stations at this point.'' Others 
see the future for local stations as truly cloudy. ``The smart people 
I see are selling out,'' said a senior executive from one of the big 
broadcast networks, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ``The people 
who say that stations are where the money is don't know what they 
are talking about. It's true today, but if you look out five years, 
you can start to hear people say, `What's the reason for this station's 
existence?' Do you need seven local newscasts in New York? Can the 
seventh station in a market compete with a cable channel like TNT 
or USA?'' Looking ahead, this executive said local television might 
someday look more like the newspaper business. ``There used to be 
10 viable newspapers in New York,'' the executive said. ``Now there 
are two and a half. That doesn't mean the newspaper business is over. 
It means for those that can't compete it's over.'' The newspaper analogy 
certainly fits with what is already happening in the local television 
business: a move toward consolidation of ownership among media companies 
and away from local ownership by everything from mom-and-pop family 
companies to local newspapers or insurance companies. ``Ownership 
is where it's at,'' said Lowell Paxson, who has aggressively assembled 
a group of small stations with frequencies like Channel 67 in Wilkes-Barre, 
Pa., and Channel 61 in Fresno, Calif., into what he hopes will be 
a viable new broadcast network, PaxTV, which emphasizes family fare. 
Making all this possible have been changes in federal regulations 
that allowed station owners to expand from what was once a limit of 
seven stations nationally. Besides Paxson Communications and Sinclair, 
other big group owners include the networks themselves and companies 
like Hearst-Argyle Television, A.H. Belo Corp., Young Broadcasting 
and Granite Broadcasting. Among the people who run these companies, 
Sweeney says Sinclair's Smith is the ``only true visionary in an industry 
not noted for producing visionaries.'' Salomon Smith Barney has a 
buy recommendation on Sinclair but considers it a ``high risk'' pick. 
Yet Sinclair is an unlikely center of entrepreneurship, a company 
whose headquarters are, for the moment, housed in the former Baltimore 
Power and Light building just off Interstate 83, along with the offices 
of WBFF-TV, the city's Fox affiliate and the station from which the 
company grew. Smith said he planned to move the corporate offices 
next year to a complex in suburban Hunt Valley. But until a few months 
ago, he didn't even have his own office, sitting instead in a large 
room that included desks for his three brothers, who are his partners, 
and all their secretaries. More recently he gave in and moved into 
a 12-by-13 cubicle of his own. ``It just got a bit too noisy when 
we were in the same room,'' he said. Sweeney, who has visited the 
Sinclair headquarters, describes it as ``a bit of a dump.'' But that 
does not mean Sinclair should be underestimated. ``Dave Smith is years 
ahead of everybody else in the business,'' Sweeney said. How so? First, 
Smith pioneered a technique known as the local management agreement, 
which allows one station to run another without owning it. By combining 
such functions as sales and administration, and creating additional 
newscasts, the arrangements can cut costs and improve profitability. 
Among the 64 stations Sinclair controls, more than 20 are in such 
agreements. (In Baltimore, for example, the company also operates 
WNUV-TV, an affiliate of the WB.) Lately, too, Smith has been the 
most vocal advocate of dividing the signals at his stations into multiple 
services for narrowly defined audiences once digital television becomes 
possible, as opposed to using them to transmit high-definition pictures. 
If that begins to make the future of television sound like the present 
of radio, that is OK with Smith, who owns about 60 radio stations 
too, as many as six in a single market. More than anything, Smith's 
vision is bigness _ the aggressive acquisition of stations, which 
has put him in the position to manage rapidly rising program costs. 
It isn't just networks, with their huge bills for professional football 
or series like ``ER,'' that have experienced programming inflation. 
Local stations spend most of their budgets on newscasts and syndicated 
programming, both first-run shows like ``Jeopardy'' and ``Xena: The 
Warrior Princess'' and repeats of ``Seinfeld'' and ``Frasier.'' Smith 
negotiates with syndicators to buy programs for his entire group _ 
and if that contributes to the homogenization of local television, 
it makes the transaction more efficient for both the content provider 
and the station owner. ``There are big advantages in scale,'' he said. 
Like almost all the big group owners, Smith has also tried to spread 
his network associations around. Sinclair has stations affiliated 
with all six networks _ an ideal situation, he said, because it insulates 
him against the cyclical nature of success and failure at the networks. 
But Sinclair has consistently preferred to affiliate itself with up-and-coming, 
less-than-full-time networks like Fox, and more recently the WB and 
UPN. On one hand, Smith said, he simply likes to be ``associated with 
gamblers like Rupert Murdoch,'' the chairman of News Corp., which 
owns Fox. But he also likes not having to share so much of his broadcast 
day _ and so many of his commercial slots _ with a network. (Local 
stations get to sell only a couple of minutes of commercials an hour 
during network programs.) Moreover, the economic relationship that 
has bound local stations to the long-established networks is beginning 
to fray. Since the days of radio, ABC, CBS and NBC have paid stations 
an annual fee, known as compensation, for carrying network programs. 
Today, each network pays its affiliates $175 million to $200 million 
a year. But network executives increasingly attack compensation as 
a crippling anachronism in an era when NBC must pay $286 million a 
year for ``ER.'' This year, ABC and CBS engaged in fractious negotiations 
with affiliates about sharing the $500 million annual cost for new 
National Football League broadcast deals. CBS won some concessions; 
ABC mainly ran into a brick wall of resistance. Network executives 
agree that more confrontations are coming _ probably by 2004, when 
many stations' contracts with their networks will expire. Will there 
be war at that point? ``I don't want to say war,'' said Klein of CBS. 
``But I'd be surprised if there weren't some serious disagreements.'' 
Smith sees no reason for a fight. The problem, he said, is that at 
the moment, too many parties are sitting at the table for fruitful 
negotiations to take place. But if the government were to raise the 
limit on market coverage _ to, say, 50 percent of all households _ 
Sinclair and other big groups would kick off a new round of consolidation. 
Then, he said, he might go to NBC and suggest that he be treated as 
a partner on a key show like ``ER.'' ``If I deliver 7 percent of the 
country for them,'' Smith said, ``I'd want 7 percent of the show. 
And I'd pay for that. I would have done that if they came to me four 
years ago when the show went on the air. Why not? We all gamble everyday. 
You just have to be more astute in gambling.'' No network, of course, 
has ever been willing to cede any percentage of its advertising profits 
to a local affiliate. For the long term, Smith is looking to the Internet 
as a place where local station ownership will find its ultimate advantage. 
``What's going to be on the Internet is all sorts of new information,'' 
he said. ``My stations will have more information than anyone in the 
cities we operate in.'' But he sees the Internet developing as a powerful 
revenue base only at some indefinable point ``in my lifetime.'' In 
the much shorter term, he said, Sinclair and other broadcasters will 
be able to open up an additional revenue stream from the division 
of signals under digitalization. Last year, Smith endured some tough 
questioning by Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., and others on the Senate 
Commerce Committee for his reluctance to explore the possibility of 
broadcasting high-definition television on new digital frequencies 
rather than splitting the signals of his stations into as many new 
program services as possible _ some of them carrying subscription 
fees. ``It makes no sense to want to be a single channel,'' Smith 
says. ``Why should I continue to allow the cable guys to pick me apart?'' 
Other broadcasters question how stations can hope to fill five or 
six additional signals with worthwhile programs. ``There's no way 
to fill even the shelf space we have today,'' said WB chief executive 
Jamie Kellner, who also controls a separate company, Acme Broadcasting, 
that owns six WB affiliates. ``How many of the 70 channels that most 
people receive can you sit and spend even a half-hour a week with?'' 
Kellner argues that the far better pictures and sound promised by 
high-definition television will be so impressive that consumers will 
eventually demand it. ``It will add a dimension to the viewing experience,'' 
he said. ``Our industry needs another jolt in technology.'' Each of 
the big networks is obligated by the FCC to establish a digital capability 
in three of its markets by November. So far, that looks like a lot 
of cost without much hope of return, said Mitchell Stern, the chairman 
of the Fox Television stations, the biggest of the network-owned groups. 
``It costs a minimum of $1 million to convert a broadcast tower to 
digital,'' he said. ``If you have to bring in all new equipment, it's 
a $7 million to $10 million investment. You may have to buy land; 
it can be nightmarish. And how many sets will be able to receive this 
technology in November? Two? The answer is essentially none. You have 
to go in the hole big time before you see any return.'' Going in the 
hole is not how Smith foresees moving Sinclair Broadcasting forward. 
``The guys who are spending money to get a better-looking single channel,'' 
he said, ``are just creating a better chance for me to go whack them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>