<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0315 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than nine months ago, on Jan. 13, 1998, as Linda Tripp was preparing 
to surreptitiously record a conversation with Monica Lewinsky at a 
hotel in the Virginia suburbs, a member of the independent counsel's 
staff explained the purpose of the enterprise. The counsel, Kenneth 
Starr, was ``conducting this recording with your assistance to assist 
its investigation of possible obstruction of justice by Vernon Jordan 
and/or others,'' Mrs. Tripp was told by the staff member. Why? Jordan 
``and/or others'' were already suspected by Starr of having found 
jobs for former Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell as a payoff 
for his silence in the Whitewater investigation. Now Starr was trying 
to find out if an effort had been made to buy off Ms. Lewinsky _ was 
there a pattern here? In effect, Jordan was the bridge on which Starr 
crossed from the Arkansas-based Whitewater matter to the Lewinsky 
affair in Washington. Millions of dollars and hundred of witnesses 
later, after the release of Starr's report to Congress and two immense 
batches of documents, there is no definitive answer to the question. 
Certainly, Jordan _ assisted, according to testimony, by some White 
House aides including John Podesta, Marsha Scott and Betty Currie 
_ looked for a job for Ms. Lewinsky in New York. They found her one, 
though it was withdrawn when the news of the scandal broke. But nowhere 
in the thousands of pages of documents is there unambiguous evidence 
of an unambiguous quid pro quo. Nowhere is there unambiguous evidence 
that the job was sought to persuade Ms. Lewinsky to lie, which would 
amount to the subornation of perjury. There are only hints, conflicting 
stories, partial views of reality, and circumstances that slide about 
in the mind. In such a murky situation, a legislator unfriendly to 
President Clinton _ a Republican, say _ could reasonably argue that 
Jordan, the president's friend, would only have gone to such great 
lengths if he had reason to believe he was silencing a mortal threat. 
But a Democrat friendly to Clinton might just as well conclude that 
Jordan was only attempting to spare the president further bother from 
an unstable woman by getting her out of town. The subornation charge 
looked a little shaky to outsiders when it was listed in Starr's report. 
The documents, the last of which were released Friday, do little or 
nothing to build a stronger evidentiary scaffold under it. At one 
point in their taped conversation, a transcript of which was part 
of Friday's batch of documents, Ms. Lewinsky advises Mrs. Tripp that 
people are telling her, ``It doesn't matter what anybody says _ you 
just deny it.'' The people involved are not specified. At another 
point, Ms. Lewinsky quotes Jordan as telling her she would not go 
to jail for perjury in a civil suit such as the Paula Jones case, 
in which she had been called as a witness. But in the first batch 
of documents, released earlier, Ms. Lewinsky stated flatly that no 
one had asked her to lie to the jury in the Jones case. And so the 
Lewinsky controversy has come to focus mainly _ some would say almost 
exclusively _ upon statements made about consensual sexual acts. The 
nation is in for more hair-splitting and more defining of terms, for 
it will be in Clinton's interest to muddy the waters here as well. 
Were the president's statements merely misleading and incomplete and 
wrong, as he has said, or were they lies? If lies, did they rise to 
the legal definition of perjury, which involves intent? If perjury, 
did they constitute grounds for impeachment? Those questions, more 
or less, have been before the public for weeks; soon the debate will 
be formally joined on Capitol Hill. In Friday's documents, the most 
vivid picture is that of Ms. Lewinsky trying her level best to persuade 
Mrs. Tripp to lie along with her. She offers Mrs. Tripp her interest 
in an Australian condominium as an inducement. The most potentially 
persuasive evidence of an intention to obstruct justice may be the 
trip of Mrs. Currie, the president's secretary, to pick up presents 
Clinton had given Ms. Lewinsky. In his own testimony to the Starr 
grand jury, Clinton said he was unconcerned about the presents. So 
did Mrs. Currie decide on her own that they needed to be retrieved? 
If not, who sent her? Those questions were not answered definitively 
by the documents, either. Clinton's new spokesman, Joe Lockhart, said 
Friday that the release of Friday's documents was part of ``a partisan 
process designed for partisan gain.'' But it was hard, on first reading, 
to see much gain for anyone. Next week the House Judiciary Committee 
will vote on whether to launch an open-ended impeachment inquiry sponsored 
by the Republicans. With a 21-16 majority, the Republicans are all 
but certain to get what they want, not only in the committee but also 
when the House as a whole votes, probably a few days later. Up to 
50 Democrats are expected to vote with the Republicans. The president's 
lawyers contended Friday night in a memorandum that Congress was about 
to embark on a proceeding that violates due process, because the offenses 
charged have not been specified before the inquiry begins. They argued 
as well that ``nothing in the Starr referral is remotely sufficient 
to warrant an impeachment inquiry.'' But they appear already to have 
lost that argument in the House. No doubt echoes of the competing 
contentions will be heard during the foreshortened campaign leading 
up to the Nov. 3 midterm elections. The outcome of the elections could 
have a large impact on what comes next: Big Republican gains would 
embolden Clinton's foes, but if the Democrats hold their own, the 
House may have second thoughts as it debates articles of impeachment. 
Everyone from Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, the Judiciary Committee 
chairman, to the president's lawyers will talk legal talk. But politics 
will count at least as much. Impeachment is so fundamental an act, 
an act that would undo the only choice that the American people make 
in common, that of a president. So it is inevitable and perhaps proper, 
as Alexander Hamilton wrote, that the process ``will enlist all their 
animosities, partialities, influence and interest'' _ even if many 
of them insist that they are already sick of the subject. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>