<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton's lawyers on Friday accused the House Judiciary 
Committee of rushing toward a ``dangerous, standless inquiry'' on 
impeachment and argued that under historical precedent none of the 
evidence put forward by Kenneth Starr, the Whitewater independent 
counsel, ``is remotely sufficient to warrant an impeachment inquiry.'' 
The legal team, made up of both Clinton's private attorneys and the 
White House counsel's office, presented their arguments in a 30-page 
memorandum on impeachment sent to the committee as it prepared to 
vote Monday to recommend the first formal impeachment inquiry into 
a president since Richard Nixon. They contended that history showed 
that neither private sexual misconduct nor perjury met the constitutional 
standard. Echoing some of the arguments of House Democrats, Clinton's 
lawyers chastised the committee for being prepared to open an inquiry 
without seeking to define a standard for impeachment. The members 
of the committee, they said, ``will be asked to judge whether the 
evidence before them (untested by the usual adversarial process) provides 
any reason to believe that the president has violated a standard of 
conduct that they have made no effort to define.'' The president's 
legal team asserted that precedent argued against impeachment. They 
cited the findings of the 1974 staff report of the impeachment inquiry 
into Nixon that an impeachable offense involves ``injury to the state.'' 
The lawyers also pointed to a congressional decision more than 200 
years ago not to impeach Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton for 
secret payments to a convicted securities swindler to cover up Hamilton's 
affair with the swindler's wife. ``It is apparent from the Hamilton 
case that the framers did not regard private sexual misconduct as 
creating an impeachable offense,'' the lawyers argued. ``It is also 
apparent that efforts to cover up such private behavior, including 
even paying hush money to induce someone to destroy documents, did 
not meet the standard.'' The memorandum was sent to the Capitol on 
a day when the House released a final 4,600 pages of evidence sent 
by Kenneth Starr. The final release of documents by the House Judiciary 
Committee set the stage for the committee on Monday to forward to 
the full House a recommendation that it approve the first formal impeachment 
inquiry into a president since 1974. In advance of the Monday meeting 
both parties sparred for advantage. The Republican chairman of the 
House Judiciary Committee on Friday accused Democrats of seeking a 
``hasty conclusion rather than the right conclusion'' to the investigation 
into Clinton as Democrats proposed a limited impeachment inquiry that 
would end by late November. Republicans, who have a 21-16 edge on 
the committee, plan to recommend that the House use the same phrasing 
it did in the Watergate inquiry into Richard Nixon and vote to investigate 
``fully and completely'' whether grounds exist to impeach Clinton. 
Conceding that they will be unable to stop the Republican-controlled 
House from opening a formal inquiry, Democrats unveiled their own 
counterproposal Friday. The intent, Democrats said, was to allow party 
members to cast a vote before the mid-term elections for further investigation 
of the president, but keep them from supporting the Republicans' motion 
for an open-ended inquiry. The plan had something for almost everyone 
in the fractious Democratic caucus. It calls for further study of 
the president's actions, but leaves open the possibility that a full 
blown impeachment inquiry could be avoided. It wraps up proceedings 
before Thanksgiving. It limits the investigation to the matters surrounding 
Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky. And it does not rule 
out censure as a possible punishment for the president. ``This is 
the fair way to proceed,'' said Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D-New York. ``Not 
only fair to the president but fair the American people.'' In his 
own report to Congress, Starr cited 11 actions by the president that 
could constitute grounds for impeachment: instances of lying under 
oath about his affair with Ms. Lewinsky, obstruction of justice and 
abuse of power in concealing the relationship. Just like Clinton's 
lawyers, the Democrats on Friday also put a heavy emphasis on defining 
an impeachable offense. Under the Democratic plan an impeachment inquiry 
would be conducted in two phases. The first phase, which would begin 
Oct. 12, would focus on setting a standard defining conduct that should 
lead to impeachment. Then the committee would hold hearings to determine 
if any of the evidence and charges submitted by Starr rose to that 
standard. If the committee found they did not, it could ``consider 
the propriety of alternative sanctions,'' meaning some kind of censure 
or fine. But if it did find sufficient evidence for further proceedings 
the committee could vote for a second phase of hearings, amounting 
to a formal inquiry, that would last until Nov. 17. The committee 
could then recommend to the full House impeachment, no action or ``alternative 
sanctions'' such as censure of the president. Rep. Henry Hyde, the 
chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, called the Democrats' proposal 
``made to order for the White House but not for the American people.'' 
``We are committed to an expeditious search for the truth,'' he said. 
``But spending a month studying the law of impeachment in the abstract, 
while brushing aside documented allegations of serious crimes by the 
president does nothing to further that goal.'' He said time limits 
on an inquiry, censure options and efforts to limit the scope of the 
inquiry, as well as efforts to define an impeachable offense before 
beginning an investigation have ``no historical or constitutional 
basis in any previous impeachment inquiry.'' He noted that it was 
the Democrats who had initially called for the committee to follow 
the same procedures that the House Judiciary Committee used during 
the Watergate hearings. He said that he had agreed to that request, 
and would provide shared investigatory and subpoena powers with the 
Democrats and allow the president's lawyers access to committee proceedings 
even when the committee is meeting is in closed session. ``These are 
highly unusual accommodations,'' he noted. While the Democratic alternative 
is not expected to pass, it was designed to give uneasy Democrats 
a way to support an inquiry while voting against the Republican proposal. 
Democrats do not want the House vote to appear bipartisan. House Democrats 
said they were still worried that anywhere from 35 to 70 Democrats 
facing tough re-election campaigns could yet defect from the party 
position when the House ends its session next week with the vote on 
opening an impeachment inquiry. On the other side of the Capitol, 
Sen. Orrin Hatch, the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, 
said that if members of Congress consider ``the totality of evidence'' 
against Clinton it will meet the standard for impeachment of ``high 
crimes and misdemeanors.'' But he said that Congress must also weigh 
what is in the best interest of the nation. ``I believe in redemption,'' 
Hatch said of Clinton at a breakfast with reporters. ``I believe people 
can overcome their faults. Naturally my heart would like to see him 
make it through this.'' He added, ``in totality there's room to impeach 
here,'' but he predicted the Senate would ultimately lack the votes 
to convict Clinton. Conviction requires a two-thirds majority. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>