<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0237 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With gunfire snapping in the wind and artillery blasts punctuating 
his sentences, the commander of the Taliban's front-line forces was 
in a boastful, triumphant mood on Friday. He removed his artificial 
leg, sat comfortably on a blanket in his small brick fortress and 
pointed a few hundred yards to the north where, lodged in the foothills, 
was the last bastion of what was once grandly called the Northern 
Alliance. ``We are giving the enemy 10 days, so that anybody who wants 
to get out can get out,'' said the commander, Haji Mullah Abdus Sattar. 
``Then, by the will of God, we will crush the life from anyone who 
remains behind.'' These are heady days for the Taliban. Mazar-i-Sharif 
fell to them in August, Bamiyan in September. They now control 90 
percent of Afghanistan, with only the army of their wiliest opponent, 
Ahmad Shah Massoud, left to conquer. Massoud's redoubt is the Panjshir 
Valley of the northeast, and many of his troops are lined up within 
sight of the Taliban here in Mirbacakot, about 12 miles north of Kabul, 
the Afghan capital. But just as a final Taliban victory seems near 
in this country left impoverished and demoralized by 20 years of war, 
so does the possibility of a savage new chapter in one of the world's 
bloodiest histories. Some 200,000 Iranian troops are staging military 
exercises on Afghanistan's western border, and Taliban officials asserted 
Friday that 10 helicopters and 25 fighter aircraft had entered their 
airspace. ``The Iranians would like to help Massoud, and their war 
games have already drawn thousands of the Taliban away from the front 
lines against him,'' said a foreign military observer in Afghanistan. 
``The Iranians could open up a second front. Or they could arm the 
thousands of Afghan refugees in Iran and train them for guerrilla 
activities.'' The Shiite Muslims of Iran are very much on the minds 
of the predominantly Sunni Muslim forces of the Taliban, especially 
after the Iranians, angry over the killings of eight of their diplomats 
and a journalist by Taliban forces at Mazar-i-Sharif, massed troops 
on Iran's border with Afghanistan and ordered war games. But while 
Iran has threatened military action, its leaders say they want to 
avoid war with the Taliban. Sattar sent a few of his men to bring 
in some rocket-propelled grenades and automatic rifles that he said 
had been captured in battle recently. The Taliban commander said the 
weapons were made in Iran and shipped to Massoud's army through Tajikistan. 
``If Iran wants to attack and get into this fight, they should not 
forget how we destroyed the Russians,'' said the mullah, alternately 
spouting bravado and sipping tea. ``Not only will we defeat the Iranians, 
we will chase them into their own land and take Tehran.'' Sattar's 
more immediate problem is the estimated 10,000 soldiers of Massoud, 
who was once this nation's defense minister and a great hero in the 
holy war that drove out Soviet invaders in 1989. The winter snows 
will begin to fall in the next two to four weeks, making the movements 
of troops and supplies very difficult and prolonging the standoff. 
Massoud, according to the mullah, is a ``caged animal,'' surrounded 
on three sides with nowhere to retreat except across the northern 
border into Tajikistan. He said he expects such a withdrawal. Unlike 
the Taliban, who are mostly members of the Pushtun ethnic group, Massoud 
is a member of the nation's Tajik ethnic minority. Tajikistan would 
be a logical refuge. On Wednesday, the pilot and crew of one of Massoud's 
cargo planes defected to the Taliban. Not only had the pilot been 
ferrying supplies from Tajikistan, said Sattar, but on return trips 
he had been taking away the personal effects of Massoud and his top 
commanders: ``So Massoud knows he is defeated. And so do his troops. 
Every day, more of them cross over and lay down their rifles, and 
we let them go away.'' The hilly terrain around Mirbacakot is littered 
with the carcasses of Soviet tanks, some of them twisted heaps that 
serve as grave markers along the important and perilous road to Kabul. 
Just as the Taliban are hard upon the Massoud forces, the Tajik commander 
is but a short drive from the capital. His rockets can hit Kabul at 
will, as one did on Sept. 21, killing more than 100 civilians in a 
medical clinic and the ice cream parlor next door. These attacks have 
been infrequent, however, for while they show Massoud's might, they 
do little to win hearts and minds. While Massoud was a famous Afghan 
warrior, the Taliban seemed to come out of nowhere in 1995. Rooted 
in the ancient ways of village life, the Taliban were appalled at 
what they described as the corrupt ways of the mujahadeen, who had 
come to power after defeating the Soviets. The Taliban were educated 
in strict religious schools and practice a puritanical form of Islam, 
insisting on isolation for women, mandatory beards for men and amputations 
and summary executions for thieves, adulterers and blasphemers. The 
Taliban are reviled by many for a creed that is considered repressive, 
but they prefer to focus on the peace they have brought to the war-weary 
areas of Afghanistan they now control. Most of the gains of the Taliban 
were relatively easy to consolidate as they marched through the Pushtun 
regions of Afghanistan. Now, however, they have won battles against 
the Uzbek and Shiite minorities of Mazar-i-Sharif and the Hazaras 
of Bamiyan. They face accusations that they killed thousands of Hazara 
civilians when they captured Mazar-i-Sharif. The Taliban will have 
to deal with ethnic and religious suspicions and enmities. ``A lot 
of the Taliban's enemies weren't actually defeated _ they just quit 
fighting and disappeared,'' said one Western military analyst. ``They 
did buying as well as fighting, paying commanders to switch sides. 
Of course, someone who takes your money today takes someone else's 
tomorrow. If Iran wants to provide much in the way of support, the 
Taliban will find themselves in a drawn-out guerrilla war.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>