<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's my first day in divorce court, and I'm waiting anxiously in the 
hall for my lawyer _ worried about how my life will change, whether 
my two children and I will have to move out of the city. And I can't 
believe what I am wearing. In a headband, pleated skirt and flat loafers, 
I look like a parochial schoolgirl _ never mind that I'm a mom in 
my 40s, given to dressing in spandex and jeans. I look like an impostor. 
But then, so do all the other women on the docket waiting in the hall, 
which is the last stop on the train of marital disillusion. For this 
lugubrious occasion, we've all been dressed by our lawyers. They're 
not interested in our personal style _ they just want us to win. It 
means looking conservative, understated and traditional, muted, respectful 
and unadorned. There is freshly snipped hair, minimal jewelry and 
no watches with bracelet bands _ only cloth bands are acceptable. 
The motto of divorce lawyers everywhere seems to be: nothing that 
glitters or glistens. I adjust my headband and console myself with 
the thought that it's retro chic. Lawyerly wisdom has long held that 
you dress for court as you dress for church: pearls and pumps for 
women, a dark suit and a white shirt for men. But in divorce cases, 
strategies of appearance are more complex. Although everyone agrees 
that a plaintiff should look restrained and respectful to win a judge's 
favor, every divorce lawyer turns out to be a stylist, with a different 
opinion of how to achieve a winning look. In the year and a half it's 
taken for my case to come to trial, I've had three lawyers, and each 
has had a different say on how I should dress for this day. Eleanor 
Grosz, the first one, sounded as affirming as a Liz Claiborne separates 
advertisement: ``Be comfortable.'' But then she gave me her list of 
don'ts: no miniskirts, no tight tops, no designer logos, no pants, 
no sandals, no fish-net stockings, no red nails, no glamorous hair 
and, for goodness' sake, no spandex. (I was wearing a tube skirt at 
the time.) I moved on to lawyer No. 2, Frank Bonem, who pictured me 
in court as June Cleaver _ if Ward had been an alcoholic with a quick 
fuse. ``You want to look like a woman who is most comfortable in the 
kitchen or doing homework with the kids,'' he said. ``You want to 
look matronly.'' He intended to portray me as a victim, so I had to 
appear in need of sympathy. That meant no suit _ a suit suggests an 
office, not a '50s kitchen _ and he proposed a conservative dress, 
the darker the better. My current lawyer, Bernard Clair, has an altogether 
different vision. He thinks I should look like a working mother, which 
is what I am, having returned to an editing career recently after 
10 years as a stay-at-home mom. His advice is to look as if I've gotten 
myself back in the saddle and just need a little boost from the court 
in the form of a generous settlement. To convey this image, I am not 
to wear my own stylish clothes but, in Clair's surprisingly precise 
words, ``a dress or skirt, knee-long, no slits, no pants, no hand 
jewelry, maybe a scarf for a touch of femininity, nothing too bright, 
don't show your toes.'' Oh, and nothing white, either. It's too aggressive. 
Do I have a pale blue blouse? Justice may be blind, but judges are 
not, and lawyers describe divorce as putting on a play. The costumes 
are critical. ``Appearance is everything,'' said Bradley A. Pistotnik, 
a lawyer in Wichita, Kan., and the author of ``Divorce War!'' He is 
one of a growing breed of experts who advise lawyers and clients on 
their appearance. ``A judge cannot help but be swayed by how you look, 
and different colors, styles, fabrics convey different messages,'' 
he said. ``This may seem to go against the principles of justice or 
seem sexist, but it is an inevitable reality.'' The growing number 
of judges who are women and can tell the difference between Armani 
and what's available from the mall has complicated the courtroom dress-for-success 
formula, lawyers say. Eleanor Alter, who has represented Mia Farrow 
and other women in celebrity cases, recalled a case in which a client 
who was seeking emergency additional child support dressed head to 
toe in Yves Saint Laurent. ``The judge, a woman, ran her eyes down 
her, adding up what everything cost, and said, `I don't think so,''' 
Ms. Alter said. In high-profile, high-stakes cases, the rules change. 
Here a woman can deck herself out. Robert Stephan Cohen, a Manhattan 
divorce lawyer who has represented many well-heeled clients, said: 
``I tell them to wear Chanel. If your husband is worth $25 million, 
you have to show that your lifestyle is money.'' Raoul Felder, another 
celebrity divorce lawyer, eschews Chanel in favor of more understated 
expensive clothes. ``Those Belgian loafers that look like nothing 
but cost about $400 a pair, or cashmere _ one of those little sweater-over-sweater 
sets,'' Felder said. ``I always ask, `Does this say lifestyle, or 
does this say I've overspent?''' Like many lawyers, Felder does a 
jewelry check just before court convenes. Marie Vaccarelli, a Boston 
divorce lawyer, explained that even if the goal is to suggest that 
the woman has grown accustomed to luxury, certain over-the-top jewelry 
can alienate the court. ``No Cartiers, Rolexes, gold chains, pinkie 
rings,'' she said. Men, too, tackle the wardrobe issue with cunning. 
Kenneth Burrows, a divorce lawyer, has sent male clients to the Salvation 
Army to buy threadbare suits. ``The guy may not be very affluent, 
but he's too proud to let it show,'' he said. ``I help him be who 
he is.'' Felder forbids male clients to slick back their hair, manicure 
beards or sport handkerchiefs in breast pockets. He goes for Clark 
Kent appeal. ``I always ask if they wear glasses,'' he said, adding 
that glasses always look good. After one trial in which Felder made 
a client wear a cheap suit to court every day, the client celebrated 
by burning it up in Felder's office fireplace. In celebrity cases, 
flourishes are allowed. Felder, who is representing Carol Channing 
in a divorce from Charles Lowe, her husband of 42 years, persuaded 
her to shed her signature blond wig and unveil the gray underneath 
_ a ploy meant to suggest that beneath the shimmery exterior, there 
has been suffering. Clair, who is representing Jocelyne Wildenstein 
in her bid for a share of the fortune the Wildenstein family made 
buying and selling art, said he might visit the Chanel boutique on 
East 57th Street to buy the same clothes and baubles that her estranged 
husband, Alec Wildenstein, is supposed to have bought for a Russian 
girlfriend. Then Mrs. Wildenstein would wear the outfit to court ``just 
to unnerve him,'' Clair said. But while the celebrities posture and 
preen, the rest of us do our best to blend. After all the advice, 
what was I to wear on my day in court? Part of me wanted to look like 
a competent mother, part felt like a victim, and in my heart of hearts 
I wanted to sweep in in a form-fitting Richard Tyler suit, not so 
much to impress my ex, but to appear tall, thin and untouchable in 
a way that a power suit conveys. In the end, I borrowed some advice 
from everyone. In the back of my closet, I found an 8-year-old skirt, 
below the knee: good. But it was black: bad, because black is a power 
color. But it had pleats: good, because pleats are conservative. I 
chose 5-year-old black flats _ not ballet slippers, just old Joan 
&AMP; David loafers. The one thing I bought was a pale blue blouse 
at J. Crew. It was just right, with a little cardigan buttoned to 
the collar. The headband, black velvet, was borrowed from my sitter. 
I wasn't thrilled about looking so colorless in front of my former 
lover on our marital D-day. But when Clair surveyed me before the 
court session, he said I'd do. And he assured me that I would have 
my day to dress as I pleased in court. ``The day the judge is signing 
off _ after the case is settled and the agreement has been signed, 
sealed and delivered _ that's the day to look fabulous,'' he said. 
``Wear your best dress, all your jewelry. It's your last goodbye to 
your husband, and you want him to think, `What did I let go?''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>