<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Saturday, Oct. 3: With 
the gubernatorial race in full throttle, New Yorkers might soon wonder 
which of the states described by the candidates is the one they live 
in. Gov. George Pataki boasts that he has cut taxes, held down spending 
and presided over an economic renewal. His Democratic opponent, Peter 
Vallone, says the governor has a poor fiscal record, saddling the 
state with more debt, budget deficits and a dismal credit rating. 
Tom Golisano, an independent candidate, is bombarding the airwaves 
with accusations that Pataki has generated $20 billion in new debt 
and actually raised taxes. Confused? In fact, these claims contain 
a blend of truth, distortions and misplaced blame. Golisano's charges 
are the most questionable. Whatever can be said about Pataki, he did 
lower taxes. The personal and business tax reductions enacted under 
him _ mostly by lowering income tax rates _ amount to $5.5 billion 
this year, or $300 for every person in the state. State tax receipts 
did go up, but that was because of the economic boom, particularly 
on Wall Street, not because tax rates had been raised. Golisano's 
other claim, that Pataki has failed to curb the growth of state debt, 
is more justified. More and more of the state's capital projects are 
being paid for by borrowing, rather than annual appropriations. Debt 
service as a percentage of the budget is also rising. The governor 
likes to point out that the rate of growth of state debt during his 
term has been half the rate incurred in the last term of his predecessor, 
Mario Cuomo. But the rate under Pataki is about the same as that under 
all 12 years of the Cuomo administration, according to figures from 
the state comptroller's office. Though one bond-rating agency has 
upgraded New York a notch, the state still has one of the poorest 
credit standings in the nation. The main cause is the state's tendency 
to enact spending and tax-cut obligations that balloon in size in 
later years, without identifying the means to pay for them, a longstanding 
practice that Pataki has not changed. When Pataki entered office, 
he faced a deficit of $5 billion and had to cut spending in his first 
two years. Though the budget is balanced this year, and though he 
eliminated many budget gimmicks, the state still faces a projected 
deficit of $5 billion in two years. Pataki likes to boast that he 
has cut the rate of spending growth considerably from the Cuomo years. 
That claim is both true and false. Over all, spending has risen at 
an average rate of 3.7 percent in the last four years, compared with 
5.7 percent in the previous four. But in this election year, state 
spending has shot up about 8 percent to pay for a campaign season 
giveaway for school aid and other items. The voters have a right to 
ask whether Pataki the cutter or Pataki the spender is the one seeking 
re-election, and also to judge the accuracy of his opponents' charges. 
The governor ran four years ago as a conservative determined to lower 
spending, debt and taxes. He has succeeded more than his opponents 
concede, but not as much as he maintains. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>