<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0384 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bilingual education in California was supposed to be in a grave by 
now, essentially killed when residents voted last spring to end it. 
The ballot initiative, supported by 61 percent of the voters, sought 
to replace 30 years of using Spanish and other foreign languages to 
help immigrant children in the state learn to read, write and speak 
English with a method that uses ``nearly all'' English instruction. 
But more than a month into the current school term, bilingual education 
is clearly still breathing. The reasons are a subject of hot debate. 
Supporters of the initiative, Proposition 227, assert that school 
districts and the education bureaucracy are resisting the will of 
the voters, taking advantage of loopholes to preserve a rejected method 
of teaching. Critics of the proposition see the bumpy transition as 
a result of confusion, reluctance on the part of some parents and 
teachers to push children into instruction they are not ready for, 
and even basic logistical issues like the lack of textbooks. What 
is clear is that the fight over Proposition 227 is not over yet. Doug 
Stone, a spokesman for the state Education Department, said he had 
heard of no open defiance of the law and ``when push came to shove, 
virtually all of the districts are complying.'' Some do not agree 
with that assessment. ``A lot of people are trying to loosely interpret 
and undermine this law,'' said Sean Walsh, a spokesman for Gov. Pete 
Wilson, a Republican and a critic of bilingual education. ``The law 
says `nearly all' should be taught in English. But many districts 
are using 40 percent Spanish and 60 percent English.'' The law does 
not define what ``nearly all'' means, so there is much disagreement 
over what constitutes compliance. Elena Soto-Chapa, the statewide 
education director for the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational 
Fund, which has gone to court seeking to block the initiative, said 
that how the hundreds of school districts across the state defined 
``nearly all'' was ``just all over the spectrum.'' Ms. Soto-Chapa 
said some districts were using a 60-40 English-foreign language formula 
while others were using 70-30 or 80-20. ''There's a lot of confusion,'' 
she said. ``It's a very political, murky environment right now.'' 
The Los Angeles United School District, with 681,505 students the 
second largest in the country behind New York City, offers two programs 
for pupils with limited English ability: Model A and Model B. In Model 
A, the classes are taught virtually all in English. In Model B, 65 
percent to 70 percent of the classes are taught in English. Alice 
Callaghan, one of the leading proponents of Proposition 227, said 
``L.A. is absolutely out of compliance.'' The state Education Department 
has set up a study group to help districts implement the law. ``We 
realized that before June 2 and after June 2 there would be more questions 
than answers,'' Stone said, referring to the day the initiative was 
approved. ``But that isn't a sign from heaven that school districts 
can thwart the law.'' Out of the 5.5 million public school pupils 
in California, about 1.4 million have a limited understanding of English, 
but only 30 percent of them were enrolled in bilingual education programs 
last year. The rest were in classes in which teachers used nearly 
all English. There were not enough qualified teachers for bilingual 
classes. Under Proposition 227, some parents are eligible to request 
that their children be retained in a bilingual program, and such waivers 
can be be granted by a school district under three circumstances: 
The child has a physical or psychological need to be in bilingual 
education, the child is over 10 years old or the child speaks English. 
But the question of waivers is also the subject of intense and varied 
interpretation and debate. Before a waiver can be granted, a child 
must spend the first 30 days of school in a class taught primarily 
in English. That period has now expired for about 25,000 Los Angeles 
pupils with limited English skills who started the new year in late 
summer. Although many expected a wave of request for waivers, only 
about 1,300 have been sought so far, said Forrest Ross, director of 
language acquisition for the Los Angeles district. Ms. Soto-Chapa 
said, ``I think a lot of parents are taking a wait and see approach,'' 
At the Logan Street School in Los Angeles, a few blocks from Dodger 
Stadium, parents of 250 of the 360 pupils eligible have asked for 
and received waivers. Those children are now in bilingual classes. 
``We're not trying to circumvent the law,'' said Logan Street's principal, 
May Arakaki. ``We're just giving the parents the options they and 
their children deserve and are entitled to.'' Mrs. Arakaki and her 
staff have had to do some fancy juggling. Mrs. Arakaki had to move 
three children whose parents signed waivers into Helen Trevino's second-grade 
class, which is primarily bilingual, and move three others into an 
English-immersion class. Still, Ms. Trevino has a class of nine bilingual 
pupils and six who are taught primarily in English, forcing her to 
go from table to table and tongue to tongue. Ideally, the class would 
be either all bilingual or virtually all English. ``I'm for bilingual 
education,'' Ms. Trevino said. ``But the new law has passed and we 
have to deal with it.'' In one twist, 39 of the nearly 1,000 schools 
districts in California _ including Los Angeles, San Diego, Fresno 
and Oakland _ have requested waivers of some kind to teaching all 
classes primarily in English_ whether for individual schools or for 
entire districts. But in August, the state Board of Education, whose 
11 members are appointed by the governor, refused to consider the 
waiver requests, saying it did not have the authority to grant them 
to districts. ``The initiative was very clear about waivers,'' said 
Bill Lucia, executive director of the state school board. ``And it 
doesn't say anything about districtwide waivers.'' After the board 
refused to hear the requests, the districts of Oakland, Hayward and 
Berkeley took the board to court, demanding that it be forced to do 
so. ``We feel that bilingual education works and we feel that our 
community believes in bilingual education,'' said Sue Piper, a spokeswoman 
for the 53,000-pupil Oakland Unified School District. ``That's not 
to say it's perfect. But our test scores show that the children who 
graduate from bilingual education do very well.'' Alameda County Superior 
Court Judge Henry Needham ruled last month that the board had to hear 
the districts' waiter requests. The board appealed the decision and 
voted to postpone action on the requests pending the outcome of the 
appeal. That could be months, and in the meantime the districts are 
required to implement the proposition. Wilson had urged the board 
to appeal Needham's decision, saying his decision ``could potentially 
eviscerate Proposition 227.'' Lucia said that some of the board members 
were also concerned that they might be sued by proponents of the proposition 
if they ruled on the waivers before the issue of the board's authority 
had been determined in the appeal. ``It could require individual board 
members to get lawyers,'' he said. ``It's a serious matter. It's a 
question of losing your house.'' The initiative says that teachers 
and administrators who implement the law improperly can be held liable. 
``We're going to be suing soon,'' said Ms. Callaghan, a leading supporter 
of the proposition. ``We won't let this go on much longer.'' The threat 
of lawsuits has also had a chilling effect on teachers. Hundreds of 
teachers in Los Angeles signed a petition last spring pledging open 
rebellion if Proposition 227 passed. The teachers vowed to risk being 
sued and dismissed by continuing to use bilingual education methods 
in their classrooms. But so far, the rebellion has not materialized 
_ at least not openly. ``Open defiance would be dismissal, and that 
was made very clear to us,'' said Steve Zimmer a member of On Campus, 
the teachers' group that organized the pledge of resistance. ``But 
you certainly still have defiance. It's just being done behind closed 
doors.'' Zimmer said that some teachers were simply teaching how they 
had always taught immigrant children, using bilingual methods, while 
others who otherwise comply with the law were still using a lot of 
bilingual methods because they did not yet have the books and other 
materials necessary to put the proposition into effect. ``There aren't 
enough books,'' he said. ``There are stories about fourth graders 
using kindergarten books.'' Still, Zimmer said, the majority of teachers 
are doing their best to comply with the law. ``Even though we did 
the pledge,'' he said, ``I can't in good conscience tell a teacher 
to let this fail so we can get rid of it. The efforts of teachers 
not to damage children is what is making this work at all.'' But Ms. 
Callaghan said she received almost daily reports of widespread non-compliance 
by teachers and districts. ``Name me a district that is not defying 
the law,'' she said. ``There will be less Spanish spoken, but that 
doesn't mean they will teach English immersion. The law required that 
bilingual education be replaced, not mended. It's going to be a very 
unfortunate year.'' Yet at individual schools like Logan Street in 
Los Angeles, it is more a year of improvisation, of trying to accommodate 
and educate at the same time. Gloria Rodriguez has two children at 
Logan, a daughter, Christina, 8, a third grader, and a son, Gabriel, 
9, a fourth grader. Her daughter began school in bilingual classes 
but tested high enough to move into classes taught in English before 
Proposition 227 became the law. Mrs. Rodriguez signed a waiver for 
her son. ``He's not ready yet,'' she said. ``My daughter is doing 
very well, and I think it is because of bilingual education. When 
she goes to college, she wants to learn Japanese and French. That 
will be four languages she will know how to speak and write. Employers 
will love her.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>