<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During a rough patch for stocks in general last week, financial shares 
in particular took a beating. Though bank and brokerage stocks rallied 
Friday with the overall market, most of these shares remain near their 
lows for the year. Investors may be tempted to think that recent market 
turmoil makes bargains out of the financials. After all, Bankers Trust 
is trading at 1.1 times its book value, down from the 2.4 multiple 
it fetched just five months ago. Merrill Lynch trades at 1.73 times 
its book value, down from a multiple of 4 in July. Does Friday's rally 
mean that the rout in these shares is over? Bank stocks may have jumped 
on hopes that Brazil's financial woes would be stanched by an international 
bailout. Investors also seem to think that another interest-rate cut 
is in the offing. But optimism on both of these matters is not enough 
to argue for a stampede into international financial services shares. 
There are solid reasons to hold off from bottom-fishing in the group 
right now. One is the not-unreasonable fear that other bombs from 
the hedge fund world might soon drop on the big international banks 
and brokerage firms that do business with these risk-takers. UBS, 
the world's second-largest bank, said on Friday that its chairman, 
Mathis Cabiallavetta, and three top executives had resigned in the 
wake of the bank's taking a $696 million charge as a result of its 
investment in Long-Term Capital Management. The bank said the resignations 
came after internal auditors found ``shortcomings in risk-management 
processes.'' Even if Long-Term Capital's near-collapse is the last 
fund disaster, the heavy exposure that banks and brokers have to the 
fund does not give investors confidence that effective risk controls 
are in place at financial firms. The announcement from UBS confirms 
that. Douglas R. Cliggott, head of United States equity market strategy 
at J.P. Morgan Securities in New York, is wary of financial services 
stocks for other reasons. ``To have confidence to move back into the 
group, we'd want to see actual stability _ as opposed to the hope 
of stability _ in emerging economies, a movement toward a more positive 
yield curve and some cost-reductions at banks and brokers,'' he said. 
The yield curve is a big factor here. Even though the Federal Reserve 
cut interest rates by one-quarter of a point last week, longer-term 
rates are still well below the federal funds rate of 5 percent. The 
2-year Treasury note closed at a yield of 4.16 percent on Friday and 
the 10-year at 4.28 percent. When long-term interest rates fall below 
the short-term variety, profit margins at banks get squeezed. That's 
because banks are unable to make as much money in their long-term 
loans as they can when shorter rates are lower. So as long as the 
yield curve remains flat, as it is today, banks' profitability will 
be pinched. Bank earnings may also be hurt by the contraction in credit 
that began with the collapse in emerging markets this summer and was 
exacerbated by the crash of Long-Term Capital. Banks seem increasingly 
unwilling to lend; if this goes on for long, the loss of fees will 
harm financial institutions' results. It will also hurt the overall 
economy. How financial stocks fare is significant because, as Cliggott 
points out, the fortunes of these companies are inextricably linked 
to the performance of the entire stock market. Financial companies 
account for almost 17 percent of the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock 
index, one of its larger components. Indeed, financial stocks have 
led the overall market up and down in each of the last eight years. 
Recent weakness in these shares has contributed to stock market malaise. 
``Financial stocks are a wonderful microcosm of the economy,'' Cliggott 
said. As a result, until they recover, the overall market might not. 
For this reason, Cliggott sees the market remaining in a trading range 
of 950 to 1,050 on the S&AMP;P 500. For how long? ``Until we get some 
confidence about earnings,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>