<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For Barbara Kennelly, the Democratic congresswoman trying to unseat 
Gov. John Rowland, the indignities are becoming an almost everyday 
event. Earlier this week, she held a noon rally in Hartford, her hometown, 
and the audience consisted mostly of bored-looking construction workers 
shepherded by union leaders from a nearby site. Last week, she spoke 
to a group of 200 business people in Danbury, and the audience had 
no questions. In the last week, two of the groups that most dependably 
endorse Democrats, the Connecticut Education Association and the Connecticut 
National Abortion Rights Action League, decided not to make a choice 
in the race. And Thursday, a new poll by Quinnipiac College showed 
her 44 percentage points behind the incumbent among likely voters. 
Things are so bad, in fact, that in Mrs. Kennelly's home district, 
the poll showed the governor leading by 27 points. And now, Mrs. Kennelly, 
the stately scion of a political family that ruled the state for decades, 
faces the very real possibility that her 23-year political career 
will end in a comedy of errors. ``This is beyond a landslide _ we're 
looking at blowout proportions,'' said Douglas J. Schwartz, the poll's 
director. ``Every issue and every group is moving Rowland's way. It's 
a wind that's catching everything and blowing it in his direction.'' 
Mrs. Kennelly, who gave up her House seat to run for governor, professes 
to be mystified about the devastating trajectory of a campaign that 
once looked so promising. Perhaps, because her name recognition helped 
her in early polls, the campaign looked more promising than it ever 
was. But certainly no one anticipated she would be in this kind of 
trouble. Why not? To many experts, one answer may lie in her political 
upbringing. Political operatives in the state say the campaign of 
Mrs. Kennelly, 62, reflects that of an old-style politician who has 
never embraced the tools and demands of a modern campaign. In fact, 
they suggest, her approach to politics seems to reflect more the attitudes 
of her father, John Bailey, a longtime state Democratic chairman, 
who spent party conventions in the green room behind the stage, where 
politicians would go to pay court. In addition, they say, she has 
not had tough re-election races during her 16 years in the House of 
Representatives, and she has thrived in the deal-cutting culture of 
the Ways and Means Committee. These days, the tool kit of the successful 
challenger's campaign includes a simple message repeated endlessly, 
an elbows-out style, an agility with sound bites, a ferocious pace 
and a faith in the potentially decisive impact of television advertising. 
By nature or necessity, Mrs. Kennelly appears to have gone forth with 
a shortage or lack of each. ``She doesn't know how to excite this 
generation,'' said Peter Breit, professor emeritus of government at 
the University of Hartford. ``She's very much her father's daughter, 
but Connecticut is no longer her father's state. People today see 
that era as arid and nonresponsive.'' But the biggest problem with 
her campaign may be her opponent. Rowland has remained popular and 
well financed in a year when incumbents everywhere are enjoying high 
approval ratings, largely because of the strong economy. Take that 
environment, stir in a lackluster campaign, and the consensus of a 
wide range of Democrats and Republicans in the state boils down to: 
There was little she could do, and she did not do it. Signs of trouble 
were evident from the beginning. Mrs. Kennelly had been reluctant 
to enter the race, but Democratic leaders seized on a poll _ conducted 
by the University of Connecticut in June 1997 _ that showed her four 
points ahead of Rowland, and they talked her into running. She warmed 
slowly to the race and did not immediately poke at what Democratic 
leaders considered Rowland's vulnerabilities, which included his record 
on education and the environment. He used last winter's session of 
the Legislature to record achievements in both areas, and she was 
left to accuse him of stealing her issues. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>