<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0304 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Regan, a retired Bell Atlantic employee, wanted to join a health 
maintenance organization near his home in Centerville, Mass., on Cape 
Cod. But the HMO said no _ he lived in the wrong zip code. ``The health 
care field today is a very confusing one,'' Regan said. For people 
in Medicare, that is an understatement. Congress decided last year 
to make over the program, the government insurance plan for 38 million 
elderly and disabled Americans. As part of the Balanced Budget Act 
of 1997, private insurance companies, hospitals and groups of doctors 
were invited to offer an array of new types of taxpayer-financed health 
coverage. The revised program, called Medicare Plus Choice, was to 
start taking shape this fall. But with only a handful of exceptions, 
Medicare options have not changed. Additionally, by last Thursday, 
the day before the deadline for HMOs to say whether they would participate 
in Medicare, existing Medicare HMOs had announced that they were exiting 
more than 300 counties around the country, forcing an estimated 200,000 
elderly people to seek new arrangements. Scrambling to explain choices 
that barely exist, government officials will mail bulletins or handbooks 
early next month to millions of people who, not surprisingly, often 
have little understanding of the thicket of rules that already govern 
Medicare. The new law portends ``mass confusion,'' said Geri Dallek, 
a health care researcher at George Washington University. ``Is this 
choice or is it chaos?'' she asked. Nancy-Ann Min DeParle, head of 
the Health Care Financing Administration, the agency that runs Medicare, 
said she ``never expected that there would be a lot of new plans this 
year.'' She added: ``For the first time, we're going to educate beneficiaries 
about what is out there. We will make them aware of the choices they 
already have.'' Standing pat may be the best policy, many health care 
experts say. As the government's mailing says, ``If you are happy 
with the way you receive your Medicare benefits now, you don't have 
to do anything.'' But even consumers who stay on the sidelines are 
likely to be upset. In many parts of the country, Medicare HMOs are 
raising charges and paring benefits. The entire Medicare program is 
being squeezed between government budget balancers holding down payments 
on one side and medical costs rising on the other. ``Many of our clients 
already have fewer choices and much higher out-of-pocket health care 
costs,'' said Diane Archer, executive director of the Medicare Rights 
Center, a nonprofit consumer advocacy group based in New York City. 
The cost pressures are pushing up premiums for 10 million people who 
supplement their traditional fee-for-service Medicare with private 
Medigap policies _ insurance that fills some gaps in government payments 
for care. And they are clouding the future of extra benefits offered 
by Medicare HMOs, which until recently were adding about 1 million 
members a year. The legislated changes were an attempt by Congress 
and the Clinton administration to give Medicare consumers a variety 
of health care options like those available to the under-65 population. 
Policy makers were also hoping to help restore Medicare's fiscal health: 
in its latest warning, the administration estimated in April that 
the program could run out of money by 2008. But the new options will 
actually add $2.5 billion over five years to Medicare costs, the Congressional 
Budget Office said, because younger, healthier beneficiaries are likely 
to congregate in the new Medicare-financed options, leaving traditional 
fee-for-service Medicare to bear a heavy burden of sicker, older people 
who tend to dislike taking chances on losing access to familiar doctors. 
Most of the savings in the period will come from provisions in the 
1997 law holding down annual increases in some fee-for-service Medicare 
payments. Additionally, premiums paid by beneficiaries for nonhospital 
Medicare coverage will rise, starting next year. The net savings through 
2002 should total $112 billion, the budget office said. The law also 
imposed new requirements on the 347 existing Medicare health maintenance 
organizations. Those not already doing so must start providing preventive 
services, like flu shots, and all will have to collect data to assess 
members' health. Eventually, Medicare payments will be adjusted to 
reflect the balance of healthy and sickly members in each health plan. 
But for now, HMOs must provide the added services at their own expense. 
In the new law, Congress established five new Medicare options: _ 
HMOs sponsored by medical groups or hospitals. _ Point-of-service 
HMOs, which typically let members visit doctors outside an HMO's network 
when pre-approved and for an extra charge. _ Preferred provider organizations, 
which offer incentives to go to certain doctors and hospitals. _ Government-financed 
medical savings accounts for people who feel healthy and prosperous 
enough to gamble on a high-deductible policy. _ A private fee-for-service 
arrangement that would let patients use their own money to pay up 
to 15 percent above Medicare fees for all services. Well-off patients 
would get access to celebrity doctors who had pushed heavily for a 
loophole in traditional Medicare fee schedules, which forbid extra 
charges to patients. So far the Health Care Financing Administration 
has received just two applications for any of the new plans: one from 
an HMO sponsored by the St. Joseph Health System in Albuquerque, N.M., 
and one from a preferred provider organization, which the agency declined 
to name. Neither has yet been approved. Many of the insurance companies, 
hospitals and doctors who had lobbied to get into Medicare apparently 
had second thoughts when they studied the new law and gauged the chill 
of rising medical costs that are outdistancing Medicare payments. 
``Nobody came to the party,'' said David Helms, a senior health care 
consultant at DuPont , the diversified chemical company based in Wilmington, 
Del. Some 90,000 retired DuPont employees and their spouses are eligible 
for Medicare. Certainly, no one has stepped forward to set up Medicare 
medical savings accounts, which had been promoted by some insurance 
companies as a potential cure-all for the anticipated crisis in Medicare 
finances. Advocates argued that people who bought high-deductible 
insurance would be careful about demanding health care, because they 
would be paying with their own money. But in a test that began before 
Congress authorized the accounts for Medicare participants, insurers 
had a difficult time selling the policies to healthy young people, 
let alone cautious elderly Americans. Golden Rule Insurance Co., based 
in Lawrenceville, Ill., which lobbied hard for the idea, has sold 
only about 50,000 policies. Insurance executives complain that restrictions 
imposed by Congress when the accounts were introduced last year _ 
for example, they could be sold only to self-employed people or workers 
in small companies _ have made them difficult to market. Regulations 
implementing the Medicare option are even more onerous, they say, 
requiring expensive investments in systems to gather data about customers. 
They also require companies to offer the high-deductible policies 
at the same rates to everyone in a county, from healthy 65-year-olds 
to ailing 90-year-olds, whose medical bills would quickly eat through 
a deductible. ``The way the regulations are being written is making 
demands that insurance companies would not normally be in a position 
to fulfill,'' said Jeff Burman, a vice president of Guarantee Trust 
Life Insurance Co. The insurer, based in Glenview, Ill., decided to 
delay offering medical savings accounts in the hope that Congress 
will ease the requirements next year. Similarly, most hospitals and 
medical groups are resisting the government's invitation to sponsor 
their own HMOs. They worry that HMO companies would boycott hospitals 
and doctors that did so, seeing them as competitors. There may also 
be fundamental flaws in the economics of such HMOs. The best hospitals, 
for example, would be most likely to attract the sickest, most expensive 
Medicare patients, while drawing fewer healthy members who would help 
spread the costs. And the provider groups would also have to make 
new investments in computer systems, marketing, claims administration 
and tracking the quality of care. ``Congress required that provider-sponsored 
organizations would have to become insurance companies,'' said Mark 
Skubic, a vice president of Healthsystem Minnesota, a nonprofit network 
that includes a hospital, groups of doctors and the big Park Nicollet 
Clinic in Minneapolis. ``That is not in our interest.'' Indeed, Healthsystem 
Minnesota is seriously considering whether it should even continue 
its money-losing contract to treat patients who belong to Medicare 
HMOs, Skubic said. Like other providers, Healthsystem Minnesota is 
reeling from a decision by Medicare officials to limit increases in 
managed-care payments to 2 percent this year. Congress had asked the 
Health Care Financing Administration to adopt a system of payments 
that better reflects differences in costs _ raising reimbursements 
in cities like Minneapolis, where health costs have been held down, 
and making up the increases by cutting back on annual rises in payments 
in high-cost markets like New York and South Florida. But Congress 
also authorized the 2 percent increases for all Medicare HMOs as well 
as a special increase for rural areas, which used up all the available 
money. The adjustments in payments that Congress has ordered have 
been put off until 2000, according to the Health Care Financing Administration. 
That was terrible news for Healthsystem Minnesota. Facing double-digit 
increases in costs, it will lose $1,000 on each of the 2,000 people 
in its HMO contract, Skubic said. Numbers like those have dissuaded 
most providers from setting up the new managed-care programs envisioned 
by the 1997 law. Crozer-Keystone Health System, a five-hospital, nonprofit 
group based in suburban Philadelphia, is one of a handful of providers 
operating an HMO under a Medicare trial run. Officials there say the 
group views the plan as a link in a chain that already includes primary 
care doctors, a preventive care center, social programs for the elderly 
and special Alzheimer's care. ``It is not an immediate slam-dunk win 
in terms of profitability,'' said John McMeekin, president of Crozer-Keystone, 
who has a knack for understatement. He expects to lose $3 million 
on the project this year and next, but hopes it will turn a profit 
in 2001. Nationally, about one in six Medicare beneficiaries has joined 
an HMO. In places where government payment rates reflect the historically 
high costs of fee-for-service medicine, some HMOs have offered plans 
that cost enrollees no extra but provide generous coverage of prescription 
drugs, an item not covered by traditional Medicare. Now, some plans 
are shutting down in states and rural areas where federal payments 
to HMOs are low. For members of these plans, Medicare Plus Choice 
means fewer choices, as they will have to either switch to another 
health plan, if one is available, or return to traditional Medicare. 
Those affected include 59,000 people in Medicare plans run by United 
Healthcare, 58,000 in those run by Aetna U.S. Healthcare and 33,500 
in Humana plans in Florida. The managed-care industry recently asked 
the Health Care Financing Administration to immediately permit HMOs 
to raise premiums and other costs they pass along to their members. 
But Ms. DeParle said she did not think that would be appreciated by 
Medicare beneficiaries. Next year, the American Association of Health 
Plans, the managed-care industry's trade group, plans to request changes 
in government Medicare payments. Karen Ignagni, president of the association, 
said that in some parts of the country, government payments to Medicare 
HMO plans were falling well below those for traditional fee-for-service 
Medicare. ``Many plans may have to cut benefits, raise premiums or 
both,'' she said in a statement to a national commission created by 
Congress to consider the future of Medicare. For most elderly Americans 
who have stayed in traditional Medicare _ and who do not receive health 
benefits from former employers _ the struggle has been to pay rising 
monthly premiums for Medigap insurance. These policies offer 10 levels 
of coverage for Medicare deductibles and other charges, at varying 
monthly premiums. The premiums range from $48 to $825 a month, according 
to a recent survey by Consumer Reports magazine. ``We cannot afford 
a supplemental policy,'' said Christina Morgan of Okanogan, Wash., 
who retired with $10,000 in a lump sum from the bank where she had 
worked and whose Medicare HMO is now withdrawing from her rural community. 
``A lot of people who are living on Social Security alone are in the 
same boat.'' Insurance experts say Medigap costs are soaring partly 
because of the loss of healthier policyholders to HMOs. ``Our enrollees 
are a little older, a little less healthy,'' said Robert Hussey, a 
vice president of United Healthcare, which provides Medigap coverage 
to 2.5 million members of the American Association of Retired Persons. 
United raised premiums 12.5 percent this year in the AARP plan and 
is requesting 9 percent increases for 1999. Other insurers have imposed 
similar increases. Marilyn Moon, a Medicare researcher at the Urban 
Institute, a Washington research center, said increases in Medigap 
premiums may drive more Medicare participants into HMO plans. Another 
option is to buy a recently introduced type of Medigap policy that 
costs less if a person uses certain hospitals. Besides retirees, probably 
no group has a bigger stake in Medicare changes than the companies 
that subsidize supplemental health care benefits for 13 million retired 
workers. And they are using the opening provided by Washington's efforts 
to encourage retirees to consider Medicare HMOs, which can save the 
companies huge amounts of money. But the closing of some Medicare 
HMOs has left some employers scrambling. Allied Signal, for example, 
was ``put in a bind'' last month when Aetna announced shutdowns of 
Medicare HMOs in which Allied had 800 retirees. The company rushed 
to seek replacement HMOs that would take its retirees and as many 
of their doctors as possible. Though most employers are woefully unprepared 
for an avalanche of inquiries _ more than half the 498 companies in 
a recent survey by the William M. Mercer consulting firm said they 
had not considered how to respond _ Allied Signal is moving vigorously 
to help 100,000 retirees understand the new Medicare choices. The 
company has scheduled 110 retiree meetings this fall, drafted an explanatory 
booklet and hired a consultant to field questions on a telephone hot 
line. General Motors, Bell Atlantic and DuPont are taking similar 
steps. ``This is not something we want to just step back from and 
let the buyer beware,'' said Bruce Bradley, director of managed care 
plans at GM. ``It's very easy for people to make a decision not in 
their interest by just responding to the marketing.'' (BOX) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>