<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The worldwide trend toward greater democracy is generally thought 
to be one of the clearest and most unarguable benefits of the end 
of the Cold War. But recent developments in once hopeful nations like 
Russia, Peru, Algeria Cambodia and the former Yugoslavia, among many 
others, have begun to give even the most devoted democrats pause. 
In these countries and dozens of others, one can find leaders who 
were elected in reasonably respectable elections but who rule in a 
manner more consistent with traditional tyrannies, without the legal 
protections typically associated with life in Western democracies. 
Fareed Zakaria, the managing editor of Foreign Affairs magazine, has 
labeled this disturbing phenomenon ``illiberal democracy'' and estimates 
that at least half the 118 ``democratizing'' countries in the world 
fit this model. ``Illiberal democracy is a growth industry,'' Zakaria 
writes. ``Seven years ago only 22 percent of democratizing countries 
could have been so categorized; five years ago that figure had risen 
to 35 percent.'' Elections can do more harm than good, Zakaria argues, 
in nations lacking a firm foundation in constitutional liberalism, 
meaning the rule of law, a free press, an independent judiciary and 
open economic transactions. Thus, Zakaria says that nondemocratic 
entities like Singapore and Indonesia ``provide a better environment 
for the life, liberty and happiness of their citizens than do either 
dictatorships like Iraq and Libya or illiberal democracies like Slovakia 
or Ghana.'' The United States and the West, he urges, should show 
more patience with semi-democratic nations with one-party systems 
or elected authoritarian rulers as long as they ``accord their citizens 
a widening sphere of economic, civil, religious and limited political 
rights.'' His views, first published in Foreign Affairs magazine (November-December 
1997) in an article called ``The Rise of Illiberal Democracy,'' has 
started a passionate, worldwide debate. On one side are scholars who 
think the 34-year-old editor may have presented a new theoretical 
foundation for American foreign policy in the next century. On the 
other are those who fear his arguments will be exploited to excuse 
and embrace oppression abroad, in much the same manner that anti-communism 
was used to justify the coddling of right-wing dictators during the 
Cold War. Owen Harries, the Australian-born editor of The National 
Interest, says Americans might benefit from a European ``raised eyebrow 
approach'' to nations that call themselves democracies in the third 
world. John Shattuck, assistant secretary of state for democracy, 
human rights and labor, and J. Brian Atwood, administrator of the 
U.S. Agency for International Development, for example, complained 
in a responding article in Foreign Affairs: ``Zakaria's liberal autocrats 
look liberal only in comparison with the totalitarian rulers that 
preceded them. The abuse of human rights and repression of political 
choice makes these autocracies poor alternatives to governments committed 
to democratization.'' If an argument cautioning against the embrace 
of too much democracy sounds heretical to Western ears, Zakaria says, 
it actually mirrors the West's own historical experience. ``Only in 
the late 1940s did most Western countries become full-fledged democracies, 
with universal adult suffrage,'' he observes. ``But 100 years earlier, 
by the late 1840s, most of them had adopted important aspects of constitutional 
liberalism _ the rule of law, private property rights and increasingly, 
separated powers and free speech and assembly.'' He says, ``The factors 
most closely associated with full-fledged liberal democracies are 
capitalism, a bourgeoisie and a high per capita GNP.'' Most such regimes 
can be found in East Asia, with the model being Hong Kong under British 
rule. Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore is also a liberal autocratic hero 
to Zakaria, even though Singapore's chief delegate to the United Nations, 
Bilahari Kausikan, insists that his nation ``has never pretended or 
aspired to be liberal.'' But Zakaria insists that Singapore is nonetheless 
destined for democracy in the long run. ``Lee Kuan Yew thinks Singapore 
will never hold elections,'' Zakaria says, but Emperor Franz Josef 
of the Austro-Hungarian Empire ``thought the same thing.'' Nondemocratic 
Taiwan, Malaysia and Indonesia all fall on the positive side of Zakaria's 
ledger as well because of the protections they offer their citizens 
regarding property rights, legal structures and trade. Owing at least 
in part to meager competition, illiberal democracy seems to be the 
leading candidate to become American foreign policy's new guiding 
paradigm. During the ``long, twilight struggle'' with the ``evil empire,'' 
the Cold War foreign policy establishment steeled itself on the ideas 
front with a slender essay published in 1946 by a Moscow embassy official 
then relatively unknown, George F. Kennan. Published in the July 1946 
issue of Foreign Affairs under the pseudonym X and called ``The Sources 
of Soviet Conduct,'' it set out the principles of containment, which 
guided American foreign policy through the fall of the Berlin wall 
43 years later. Since 1989, however, U.S. foreign policy mandarins 
have drifted aimlessly in an intellectual sea of circumstance without 
ideological ballast. That summer, Francis Fukuyama offered up a strong 
contender in the new paradigm sweepstakes, entitled ``The End of History.'' 
This former State Department official argued that no great challenges 
to Western-style liberal capitalism were likely to arise and so, ideologically 
speaking, history had ended. Critics found Fukuyama's thesis provocative 
but difficult to apply to the real world, and recently even Fukuyama 
has articulated reservations in light of Russia's backsliding toward 
the possibility of a state-controlled economy. In 1994 Samuel Huntington, 
the Harvard political scientist and Zakaria's mentor, offered a thesis 
based on the notion of a global ``clash of civilizations.'' Huntington 
divided the globe largely into Western nations and the Muslim world, 
which ``threatened Western domination'' with ``kin-country rallying'' 
and ``the threat of broader escalation.'' Despite some initial excitement, 
his rigid division also failed to cohere as an agreed-upon new paradigm. 
Stanley Hoffmann, who was also an adviser to Zakaria in the Harvard 
government department, is considerably less sanguine. He notes that 
the idea that ``universal suffrage can be exploited is something we 
have known since the French Revolution.'' He shares the view that 
the argument will be ``used for a defense for authoritarian regimes 
that are preferable to democracy.'' Critics of both the neo-isolationist 
left and the neo-conservative right join Hoffmann, a liberal internationalist, 
on this point. Bruce Cumings, a Korean specialist at the University 
of Chicago, says that Zakaria has wrongly attributed South Korea's 
progress as a democracy to the presence of liberal constitutional 
prerequisites, like an open economy and respect for the right to own 
property. ``It was pressure from below,'' he argues, ``from the unions 
and the radicalization of the middle class that forced the autocrats 
from power. Before this took place, whatever rights people had were 
to a considerable degree a sham, because property and liberty could 
be removed from any individual overnight at the whim of the ruling 
elite.'' The conservative Robert Kagan, a senior associate at the 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, is also 
unpersuaded. He says most of the countries Zakaria is talking about 
are simply dictatorships. ``They are tyrannies,'' he says. ``Fareed 
has labeled a phenomenon that doesn't exist.'' Kagan also worries 
about what will happen if paradigm and policy align themselves. He 
says Zakaria's proposal may soon guide U.S. foreign policy because 
``the foreign policy community is dominated by realist thinking and 
business interests, and the corporate community would love to hear 
that you don't want to promote democracy.'' Not everyone endorsing 
the theory fits Kagan's categories, however. Sherle Schwenninger, 
a senior fellow of the liberal World Policy Institute, thinks the 
adoption of the Zakaria paradigm would improve United States foreign 
policy by helping ``to temper America's moralizing tendency to look 
only at the superficial aspects of democracy.'' The argument, he says, 
``helps people to understand that democracy building is a longer-term 
historical process that requires a lot of favorable conditions coming 
together.'' Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott says the word 
``democracy has come to stand for a bit of an oversimplification.'' 
Without directly addressing Zakaria's model, Talbott maintains, however, 
that it ``would be wrong and unfair to suggest that the U.S. government 
support for democracy is limited to a simple-minded `vote free, vote 
fair, vote frequently' strategy. It is much more sophisticated about 
fostering and sustaining liberal institutions than such criticisms 
imply.'' Yet whether illiberal democracy gains currency as a governing 
paradigm may depend less on the idea's specific merits than on the 
historical moment itself. As Hoffmann wearily observes: ``Today is 
not a time for big ideas. Foreign policy paradigms today are a lot 
like French fashion. They are launched with lots of fireworks, but 
we move on so quickly, nothing can be resolved.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>