<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Can John Meriwether, the founder of Long-Term Capital Management and 
the man behind the hedge fund's crumbling tower of multibillion-dollar 
bets on world financial markets, make another comeback? In 1991, Meriwether, 
then a top executive and a star bond trader at Salomon Brothers, was 
ousted after a subordinate sought to corner the market on sales of 
U.S. government bonds. Three years later, he raised $1.5 billion from 
Wall Street colleagues and founded Long-Term Capital, which became 
one of the world's most aggressive and profitable hedge funds. The 
near-collapse of Long-Term Capital last month nearly wiped out the 
stakes of Meriwether, his 16 partners and outside investors, and made 
him synonymous with speculative excess. ``His obituary has already 
been written,'' a long-time friend said. ``The man who nearly broke 
the world.'' But such judgments may be premature, others say. The 
consortium of 14 financial firms that pumped $3.6 billion into Long-Term 
Capital, rescuing it from certain bankruptcy, agreed to keep Meriwether, 
his partners and his management team intact as a condition of the 
deal. He and his partners still control 3.3 percent of the equity 
in the fund. And Wall Street executives involved in the bailout say 
that Meriwether and his 180-member team will be paid 1 percent of 
assets as a management fee and a 12.5 percent share of annual profits 
over a hurdle level. If the banks and brokerage houses that rescued 
Long-Term Capital are right, and its bets on world bond and equity 
markets eventually pay off, Meriwether and company can quickly pocket 
tens of millions of dollars under that incentive plan. ``Of course 
people are angry at him; they blame him for this,'' said a brokerage 
firm executive involved in the bailout. ``But as far as I know, no 
one suggested that he should go _ that you should break up the partnership. 
Put it this way: If he does well, we all do well.'' The potential 
for Meriwether to make a comeback has already begun to raise questions 
among critics of the Long-Term Capital bailout, which was brokered 
by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Some critics have questioned 
whether the effort to save the fund was necessary, and whether it 
might send the wrong message to other big speculative funds. At congressional 
hearings to discuss the Long-Term Capital rescue Thursday, there were 
also questions raised as to why the deal backed by the Federal Reserve 
was more favorable to Meriwether than an alternative proposal put 
forward by private investors, including Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co. ``Perhaps 
the only smart deal of the month that Long-Term Capital did was they 
played the Fed off against another party,'' said Rep. Jim Leach, R-Iowa, 
who is chairman of the House Banking Committee, referring to Meriwether's 
rejection of the Goldman deal and his acceptance of the terms offered 
by the bank consortium. Long-Term Capital is not certain to return 
to profitability, of course. The continued sharp rise of the U.S. 
government bond market is unfavorable to Long-Term Capital's positions, 
traders say, and may be causing deeper losses for the fund now. There 
is no prospect of returning to profits until the worldwide investor 
flight to quality eases, relieving the stress on riskier securities 
that Long-Term Capital owns. The Wall Street firms that now control 
the hedge fund have installed six derivatives, bond and risk management 
experts at Long-Term Capital responsible for looking over Meriwether's 
shoulder each day _ and making the ultimate calls of key investment 
and management decisions. The firms could also decide to liquidate 
Long-Term Capital positions and essentially dismantle the fund, leaving 
Meriwether and his colleagues with little. Moreover, people who work 
for Long-Term Capital say that 3 or 4 of the 16 partners borrowed 
heavily from banks to finance their equity stakes in the fund, and 
now face the prospect of personal bankruptcy. Still, there are signs 
that the worst is over for Long-Term Capital's principals. The fund's 
new investors have de-emphasized their early goal of an ``orderly 
liquidation'' of Long-Term Capital's positions. Most now talk of a 
three-year time frame for managing the fund. Many bank executives 
familiar with Long-Term's gambles also see them as fundamentally sound, 
if highly overleveraged, and talk about making big profits when markets 
come back. Most important, a consensus has emerged among the consortium 
members that Meriwether should stay. For one, he is the person most 
familiar with Long-Term Capital's complex derivatives positions. And 
in his absence, the 14 consortium members, already prone to disputes, 
might find it difficult to agree on a successor. ``It would be foolish 
for us to get rid of him and then try to agree on someone else,'' 
said the Wall Street executive involved in the bailout. ``Our best 
bet was to give him the incentives to do well.'' Long-Term Capital 
partners who face possible bankruptcy might also get some relief. 
There are now attempts to negotiate agreements with their creditors, 
which include Bear, Stearns and Credit Lyonnais, that would prevent 
them from having to file for personal bankruptcy. One alternative 
explored in recent days would give creditors a claim on the future 
earnings of these hard-pressed managing partners. Some people associated 
with the fund have also speculated that some of the managing partners 
who are in better financial circumstances may help others who now 
face bankruptcy as a way of maintaining the Long-Term Capital team. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>