<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0287 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq failed to gain any ground here this week and decided Friday not 
to resume cooperation with arms inspectors after days of hints that 
a change of policy could be imminent, diplomats and officials said. 
After a meeting Friday between Secretary-General Kofi Annan and Tariq 
Aziz, Iraq's deputy prime minister and liaison with the United Nations 
on sanctions issues, a spokesman for the secretary-general said only 
that the two had talked and would meet again on Wednesday. That will 
coincide or follow on the heels of a Security Council meeting to consider 
major reports on Iraq's compliance with disarmament requirements. 
The reports _ from the U.N. Special Commission, which monitors biological, 
chemical and missile systems, and by the International Atomic Energy 
Agency, which watches nuclear programs _ are due to be sent to the 
council by Monday. The previously scheduled periodic review of sanctions 
that should follow the reports is now on hold because of Iraq's decision 
on Aug. 5 to bar spot or surprise inspections and allow only remote 
monitoring and repeat visits to known sites. Those periodic reviews 
cannot resume _ and therefore sanctions cannot be lifted under Security 
Council resolutions _ until inspectors get full freedom of action. 
The obstacle to an arrangement that would allow the Iraqis to alter 
their position on inspections in return for a more comprehensive review 
of all of Baghdad's relations with the United Nations is the lack 
of consensus in the Security Council on what that review would cover, 
and in what sequence. The Iraqis continue to hold out hope that a 
different kind of review, which they want the secretary-general to 
oversee, would be the key to lifting at least some part of the embargo 
which has crippled the Iraqi economy since it was imposed in 1990. 
The Iraqis, backed by friends on the Security Council, would lobby 
for a closing of files on nuclear weapons and missile systems, diplomats 
said, and follow that with a demand that oil sales be allowed to resume. 
The United States would insist on looking at a range of demands, some 
of them unrelated to weapons, that Iraq has not met in more than eight 
years of sanctions. But neither the friends nor the foes of Iraq on 
the Council gave Aziz any hope this week that a comprehensive review 
could be held before inspections resumed. He heard the same message 
from Annan and other U.N. officials, aides said. Iraq was on the offensive 
this week against the Special Commission, known as UNSCOM, and its 
chairman, Richard Butler, an Australian arms-control expert. In a 
letter to the secretary-general on Thursday, Aziz asked again for 
an investigation of the commission because Baghdad believes that it 
harbors spies. On Friday in Baghdad, Iraqi newspapers, all of which 
reflect the government line, specifically cited the United States 
and Israel as the nations with which UNSCOM was sharing information 
about Iraq. Iraqi newspapers said Aziz told the secretary-general 
in his letter that an investigation of the commission was necessary 
``to guarantee the United Nations credibility, neutrality and reputation.'' 
The renewed clamor for an investigation follows remarks made by Scott 
Ritter, an American who resigned from the commission in August, asserting 
that the United Nations and the United States were failing to put 
adequate pressure on Iraq. Some of Ritter's comments were made to 
an Israeli newspaper, in which he was quoted as saying that he had 
shared information on Iraq with the Israelis. Ritter, an expert in 
concealment techniques, is under FBI investigation in Washington on 
charges that he passed intelligence to the Israelis, charges that 
he denies. The situation has, however, created significant diplomatic 
problems for the Special Commission and the United Nations itself 
in the Middle East, diplomats said Friday, because Iraq has claimed 
that Ritter's remarks prove that its charges of Israeli and American 
espionage were true. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>