<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0331 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For a roundup of this fall's most directional clothing, look no further 
than the catalog for Red Kap Industries, a maker of industrial uniforms. 
There on the low-gloss pages is a compendium of some of the trendiest 
motifs that have been coming down high-fashion runways. There are 
pearl-gray Touchtex shirts with reflective orange stripes suggestive 
of Helmut Lang's detailing; flameproof laboratory coats like suits 
from Jil Sander and Prada (one even comes in ``visual green,'' the 
pistachio color of the walls in Prada boutiques); leather belts with 
Velcro closures like Alessandro Dell'Acqua's leather jackets, and 
a hooded white jumpsuit for a dust-free ``clean room,'' reminiscent 
of the head-to-toe white offered by everyone from John Bartlett to 
Ralph Lauren. Though the death of minimalism has long been predicted, 
many designers have simply gone one step further on the same road, 
toward an austere, superclean laboratory esthetic. White sweaters, 
white pants, white parkas, white scarves, white shoes and white bags, 
for men and women, are now appearing in stores and fashion magazines 
everywhere. From the padded, protective dresses by Jil Sander, to 
hospital-orderly-esque shoes by Prada, there is a penchant for sterility, 
safety and calm. If any film seems to have inspired the moment, it 
is ``The Andromeda Strain,'' the 1970 thriller in which germ-free, 
white-clad scientists race to contain a deadly virus from space in 
an underground lab. ``It's about being on the right side of the needle,'' 
said Dr. Valerie Steele, a professor at the Fashion Institute of Technology. 
``The Armani coat has signified power for 20 years; the lab coat is 
completely different. This is a more visceral power. It's about being 
physically and totally in control.'' One of the superlatives applied 
to '90s fashion has been ``clean,'' and you can't get much cleaner 
than a lab coat. With anxieties over exotic diseases like the hantavirus, 
prenatal genetic tinkering and computer-aided invasion of privacy, 
the clean room, where computer chips are made by technicians in protective 
bunny suits, is an archetypal image _ a bomb shelter for today. And 
the impulse is not confined to clothing. Makers of products like hand 
soap and body lotions have sought to increase sales by putting ``antibacterial'' 
on the label. At old furniture stores, medical cabinets are big sellers. 
One of London's trendiest restaurants is Pharmacy, where waiters dress 
in surgeons' coats and the decor includes medicine cabinets stuffed 
with pills. Clairol has introduced a line of hair-care products called 
Daily Defense, which are promoted as combating ultraviolet rays and 
pollution. Meanwhile, Helmut Lang's fall and winter collection, a 
virtual whiteout, made its debut on the Internet, germ-free. Designers 
have been trying to tap into high-tech culture for several seasons. 
One fanciful attempt was a cat suit that could actually plug its wearer 
into the Internet. Now, with the laboratory-chic look, they have found 
a much easier way to suggest high technology, offering a vision of 
order and safety. If some collections look as if the designers suffer 
from repetitive strain injury, well, customers can relate. The minimalist 
moment in the early and mid-'90s, Dr. Steele said, put architects 
like John Pawson and artists like Donald Judd and Dan Flavin on pedestals. 
The sterile look is a logical progression. ``There's an overlap with 
the architects, in the knowledge of the very technical,'' Dr. Steele 
said. ``It's a combination of the minimal and the medical, with a 
sort of creepy sadomasochistic edge to it, and it plays into our fears 
about technology and biotechnology. You're choosing to look as though 
you were the one who has the power over life and death.'' Or at least 
the power over how long you'll have to wait for your lab results. 
Some designers are quite consciously working this niche. Wearmart, 
a small store on Elizabeth Street, sells clothes that look as if they 
have been purloined from a hospital laundry. Clothes from World Wide 
Web, a label of the Sportswear Company, a trendy Italian fashion house, 
are made of high-tech, sometimes uncomfortable fabrics in industrial 
colors like light gray and orange. The authentic articles from Red 
Kap Industries can be found at OK Uniform, which until recently was 
in SoHo, the heart of fashion territory, but is now at 368 Broadway, 
between Franklin and White Streets. The design of the World Wide Web 
label, according to its Web site, ``is assigned to Lorenzino Piazzi, 
who, for a long time, studied and researched the comparative systems 
of apparel development in civil, industrial and military areas.'' 
Whatever that may mean, it does sound properly technical, like something 
on ``The X-Files.'' Indeed, Special Agent Dana Scully _ a medical 
doctor and today's answer to Spock _ seems to be this fashion moment's 
rightful muse, thanks to her cool beauty and relentlessly scientific 
mind. But Agent Scully would no doubt point out that, logically, there 
is no proof that consumers consciously seek antibacterial properties 
in fashion (even though the latest perfume by Comme des Garcons, Odeur 
53, comes in hermetically sealed packaging). She might explain that 
the lab look is merely the latest in a line of '90s trends _ from 
monastic to thrift-shop chic _ that denote a distaste for greed and 
excessive materialism. Laboratory denizens are usually perceived as 
motivated by purely intellectual challenges, not money-grubbing impulses. 
Lang, who says his main influences are traditional tailoring and the 
spirit of punk rock, insisted that science was not part of the equation 
in his recent collections. ``We just started with an old classic Burberry-style 
coat that we've translated to our shape,'' he said. ``But I can see 
how it reminds people of a lab coat. When you have a completely white 
outfit, people do associate it with that. But the clothes have no 
scientific appeal for me.'' Hmm. His denial would probably arouse 
the excitable suspicions of Scully's colleague Agent Fox Mulder. Could 
there be a Clorox conspiracy behind this lab look? Bleach sales are 
known to rise through the summer, peaking in August. But think what 
a moneymaker bleach would be if everyone wore white year round. Not 
to mention the corrosive effect of bleach on fabric, which would mean 
a shorter life span for clothes, leading to a rise in clothing sales. 
Like-minded theorists might want to consider the film ``The Man in 
the White Suit,'' from 1951, in which a bumbling scientist played 
by Alec Guinness concocts a revolutionary white fabric that won't 
stain, tear or wear out. It threatens the entire fashion industry, 
inspiring a rare agreement between garment workers and manufacturers, 
who all desire the destruction of the formula and its creator. As 
this farce makes clear, fashion doesn't need any more conspiracy theories 
than it already has. They would only be redundant. Styles will inevitably 
change. Everyone will have to replace wardrobes anyway. The truth 
is out there. It's in Milan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>