<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During one of the first performances of Astor Piazzolla's self-described 
``little opera,'' ``Maria de Buenos Aires,'' in 1968, a voice rose 
from the audience, repeatedly emitting profane exclamations. Backstage 
after the show, the culprit was discovered: it was the Brazilian poet 
Vinicius de Moraes, paying homage in his paradoxical way to the composer's 
astonishing achievement. Piazzolla, after all, had managed to compose 
a musical theater work that, like the rest of his Nuevo Tango music, 
defied popular and classical categories and stood in a class of its 
own. Despite Piazzolla's description, ``Maria de Buenos Aires,'' which 
the violinist Gidon Kremer and his instrumental ensemble, Kremerata 
Musica, will present in a concert version from Wednesday through Friday 
at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, is not really an opera as we know 
it. The vocal interventions are more often recited than sung; the 
singing is written for tango or cabaret performers, and the original 
orchestra was a mere extension of Piazzolla's own quintet, of bandoneon, 
violin, guitar, piano and bass, with strings, flute and percussion, 
adding up to only 11 players. What's more, the original performances 
were oratoriolike events, in which the singers, narrator and band 
shared the stage, almost statically. The music of ``Maria de Buenos 
Aires'' is choice Piazzolla. The vocal segments feature memorable 
melodies in a variety of styles, from the composer's trademark pulsating 
tangos to dreamy milongas and waltzes, and even the odd march. The 
music beneath the recitation lends inspiring background without being 
obtrusive, and the instrumental segments rank among the best examples 
of Piazzolla's output. The theme ``Fuga y Misterio,'' for example, 
weaves a superb fugue out of a 12-bar syncopated theme chock-full 
of notes, segues into a powerful tutti and ends in a quiet Baroque 
arioso. Piazzolla himself regarded ``Maria'' as the beginning of his 
most productive period and the precursor of his most successful songs. 
Many of those, like the widely performed ``Balada Para un Loco,'' 
were co-authored by the other person indissolubly linked to ``Maria 
de Buenos Aires,'' the Uruguayan-born poet Horacio Ferrer. As a teen-ager, 
Ferrer met Piazzolla, who was 12 years older, in 1948, when the composer 
was a band leader in Buenos Aires. After the publication of Ferrer's 
first book of tango-inspired poems, in 1967, Piazzolla suggested that 
they work together on a piece for musical and poetic theater. They 
rented a summer house in the tiny seaside resort of Parque del Plata, 
Uruguay, and wrote most of ``Maria'' together during 30 days of frantic 
work. In addition to writing the libretto, Ferrer played El Duende 
(The Goblin), reciting his poetry onstage in the initial run of performances 
and in the original-cast recording of 1968. He will reprise that role 
in the BAM version alongside Argentine singers, Julia Zenko and Raul 
Lavie. The performances follow a new recording of the work by most 
of the same forces, led by Kremer, who is one of the most forceful 
and dedicated champions of Piazzolla's music today (Teldec 3984-20632-2; 
two CDs). The significance of these efforts cannot be overestimated. 
Latin American opera and musical theater are rare commodities outside 
and even within Latin America, and ``Maria de Buenos Aires'' has had 
a motley performance career. The original run was a financial disaster. 
``My father had to sell everything to keep the show going, even his 
modest Fiat 600 car, in order to pay the carpenters for the scenery,'' 
the composer's son, Daniel Piazzolla, said recently. Reviews were 
mixed, and the few foreign performances did not materialize until 
much later. Part of the problem with exporting the work may have stemmed 
from the libretto, which is written in Lunfardo, the slang of the 
Buenos Aires and Montevideo demimonde and of many tango lyrics. An 
obscure dialect of Spanish incorporating Italian, French and Portuguese 
expressions, Lunfardo is hard even for Spanish speakers to understand. 
Then, too, the story is bound to confound those expecting a traditional 
opera plot. Ferrer's poetry mixes a surreal and symbolic cocktail 
of the common life of the Rio de la Plata, the mythical world of tango 
and prostitution, and Roman Catholic religion and rituals. Maria was 
born in the suburbs ``one day when God was drunk,'' the text proclaims. 
``The mother wove idleness; the father hauled down failures.'' Rejecting 
the call of innocent, pure love, she departs for the great city, where 
she descends into a life of tango and prostitution, which ends in 
her death at the end of Act I, early by operatic standards, and her 
condemnation to roam the streets of Buenos Aires, escaping sunlight. 
In Act II, Maria's shadow encounters surreal interlocutors, including 
a Circus of Freudian Analysts. The Goblin pines for the lost Maria 
and conveys a message, offering her the secret of fertility and redemption. 
Consistent with an elaborate parallel to the Mother of Christ, Maria, 
immaterial and thus ``virgin forever,'' is united with the spirit 
of the Goblin and gives miraculous birth not to a boy but to a girl, 
also called Maria. A fantastical story, blasphemous to boot, and a 
challenging libretto have added to the fascination as well as the 
difficulty of ``Maria de Buenos Aires.'' Efforts to ``fix'' the work 
have included an adaptation by two Argentines, Jacobo Romano and Jorge 
Zulueta, which was presented by the Houston Grand Opera in 1991. With 
the narration mostly obliterated and the singing parts extended, the 
operation was a success, but the patient lay dead on the table. The 
adaptation is roundly condemned by Daniel Piazzolla, who says that 
his father disapproved of it, and by Kremer, who hews close to the 
original format. Kremer's recording uses a new arrangement by Leonid 
Desyatnikov, which reduces the forces to only eight instruments and 
tries to update the sound. The reassignment of parts, though by no 
means an improvement, remains respectfully and serviceably close to 
the original. The new recording invites comparison with the 1968 version 
(on a Trova CD), which may still be found in stores. There, Piazzolla 
himself, on bandoneon, was joined by Amelita Baltar and Hector de 
Rosas as vocalists. Wisely, Kremer professes no desire to improve 
on that performance. ``The substance of the piece, the incredible 
balance between the poetry and the music, was lost in some of the 
recordings,'' he said, ``except the very first one, which remains 
a document that we should all respect.'' Indeed, Piazzolla leads his 
instrumentalists with demonic force, and the vocalists are splendid, 
obviously benefiting from their prolonged theatrical exposure. Ms. 
Baltar, a folk singer, was Piazzolla's longtime lover in a relationship 
that ended in acrimony. As Maria, her voice is tremulous, breathy, 
rough and limited in range, but her unique delivery and involvement 
are hard to surpass. None of the Kremerata artists can yet claim such 
absolute ownership of the material, but they deliver a loving and 
legitimate version. Ferrer, Ms. Zenko and Jairo, the male vocalist, 
joined Kremer just days before the recording. The tempos are consistently 
slower than in the original version, and the singers are more cautious 
with rubato. It will be interesting to see on Wednesday how the current 
Kremerata tour with the work has affected interpretation. The Kremerata 
recording is beautifully produced, with extended historical notes 
and complete translations of the libretto in German, French and English. 
(The English is about 95 percent accurate.) The sound is clear, but 
balances sometimes favor the instruments to the detriment of the singers 
and narrator, who will be aided by amplification in live performance. 
Kremer's recent dedication to Piazzolla is remarkable. He has released 
two splendid volumes on Nonesuch (``Hommage a Piazzolla'' and ``El 
Tango'') and has recently recorded an album with the young Kremerata 
Baltica and another featuring ``The Four Seasons of Buenos Aires.'' 
``Coming to Argentina and listening to plenty of tangos, I always 
heard this very special voice that appealed to me and would say, `There 
is a personality,' and this personality was Astor Piazzolla,'' Kremer 
said. ``As with any other genius of old times or new times, I just 
wanted to come as close as possible. At that time, I didn't even dream 
of performing it. But later, when I found myself able to participate 
in it, there was no other choice than just to look for more and more 
scores or instrumentations, or create instrumentations myself, in 
order to feel at home in Piazzolla-land. ``Piazzolla said, `I wrote 
all kinds of music, but never happy music.' This was a striking statement 
for me because Franz Schubert said the same in a letter to a friend. 
Since I was close to Schubert, it was rather easy for me to build 
a bridge to Piazzolla. Piazzolla in his works, in his constructions, 
gives me the freedom I don't always find in other contemporary composers. 
I am not yet over with the Piazzolla frenzy in my life. I am still 
fully in love with this composer, and I can imagine that I will still 
have something to do with him in the future.'' Meanwhile, Kremer offers 
a rare opportunity to take a serious look at ``Maria de Buenos Aires.'' 
Will the public penetrate its mysteries? Will stage productions follow? 
From heaven or hell, the maestro is watching. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>