<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0297 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After plunging the last two days, stocks rallied Friday. But the recovery 
may be no more than the expected rebound after a long fall. Although 
the Dow Jones industrial average rose 152 points, it had plunged 448 
points on Wednesday and Thursday and ended the week lower, breaking 
a three-week rally. Friday's surge was led mostly by the stocks that 
had fallen the previous two days. And the forces that are pushing 
stocks lower have not gone away: financial crises abroad, declining 
earnings expectations at home and uncertainty about what the United 
States and its allies will do to contain the situation. The selloff 
on Wednesday and Thursday, according to some analysts, was prompted 
by disappointment in the Federal Reserve's decision to limit its cut 
in interest rate to a quarter of a percentage point, instead of a 
half. Now some analysts are saying the market rallied Friday on the 
expectation of further rate cuts by the central bank. Alfred Goldman, 
the director of market analysis at A.G. Edwards Inc. in St. Louis, 
had a simpler view. ``The market was oversold and bargains showed 
up,'' he said. The September employment report, released Friday, showed 
that job creation was less than forecast, signaling an economic slowdown. 
That report raised expectations for further Fed rate cuts, which could 
encourage equity investors because lower short-term interest rates 
would help prevent a recession. But the slowdown in growth could also 
create more earnings problems in the short term for American companies, 
which would be a negative for equities. On a day when the stock market 
rallied, bond prices moved higher, which also may be a negative. On 
most days recently, when the stock market has risen, it has drawn 
investors out of the bond market, pushing bond prices lower and their 
yields, which move in the opposite direction, higher. But Friday's 
bond rally may mean that many investors remain worried about the economic 
outlook and skeptical that a stock market rally can last long enough 
to be worth joining. The near-failure of Long-Term Capital Management, 
the hedge fund, has caused such nervousness, said Ward McCarthy, a 
managing director at Stone &AMP; McCarthy Research Associates in Princeton, 
N.J., that some people believe there are only two assets to invest 
in: Treasury securities and everything else, which is too risky. The 
30-year bond yield dropped to 4.84 percent Friday, the lowest for 
long-term government securities in more than 30 years. The Dow jumped 
152.16 points, or 2 percent, to 7,784.69, while the Standard &AMP; 
Poor's 500-stock index rose 16.21 points, or 1.6 percent, to 1,002.60. 
The market indexes were led higher by stocks like Coca-Cola, which 
have recently fallen after warning that their earnings would be lower 
than forecast, and by financial stocks, which had been hurt by fears 
of the fallout from Long-Term Capital. Coca-Cola rose 2 11/16, to 
58 15/16; Citicorp climbed 6}, to 95, and Bankers Trust finished 2] 
higher at 57 7/16. Oil stocks also rose. The Nasdaq index, which is 
dominated by big technology stocks, rose 2.65 points, or two-tenths 
of 1 percent, to 1,614.98. It was held back by sharp falls in Peoplesoft, 
which fell 8 3/16, to 24 5/15, and BMC Software, which dropped 6[, 
to 51~. Peoplesoft makes software used to track personnel and inventories 
and is facing stiff competition in a market that is being hurt by 
slowing growth. BMC, a maker of corporate management software, may 
have been hurt by fear of fallout from that market. The Russell index 
of 2,000 smaller-company stocks fell 0.33 point, or 0.9 percent, to 
349.71, indicating that the rally Friday focused on the bigger-name 
companies that have drawn investor attention all year. One of the 
big decliners was Monsanto. It plunged almost 15 percent before rallying 
to close at 52, down 2[, on rumors that the company's pending acquisition 
by American Home Products was collapsing. Analysts said investors 
had become suspicious of the deal's closing after American Home Products 
repeatedly delayed the release of the deal's proxy statement. American 
Home Products said Friday that the acquisition was still on track. 
As investors look ahead, the key to the outlook seems to be what the 
United States and its allies will do to try to contain the economic 
crisis that has toppled Asia and engulfed Russia and now menaces Latin 
America. To that end, President Clinton announced a series of initiatives 
Friday that coincide with the semiannual meeting of the International 
Monetary Fund and the World Bank in Washington. Goldman of A.G. Edwards 
argued that one of the sparks for Friday's rally was the approval 
of bank reform legislation in Japan, a key part of any program to 
turn around the Japanese economy. There are two obvious paths from 
here. Both seem to be positive for bonds. One is not good for stocks. 
Under the first scenario, there would be more money for the IMF; a 
provisional rescue package for wobbling countries in Latin America, 
and more international cooperation, reassuring investors that the 
contagion can be contained. Although contained, the economic drag 
from the recessions in much of the rest of the world would still force 
the Fed to lower interest rates further. That would be good for bonds 
and could stabilize stocks. Alternatively, there would be no rescue 
package for Latin America and no new money for the IMF. That would 
put more pressure on the Fed to cut rates. This would not be good 
in the near term for stocks, as it would encourage fears that the 
crisis might spread to Latin America and finally the United States. 
But a new flight to safety and prospect of much slower growth here 
would send bond prices higher and yields lower. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>