<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The colon cancer for which the Yankee outfielder Darryl Strawberry 
will undergo surgery Saturday afternoon is common among people over 
50 but is rare for someone his age, 36. Strawberry is one of an estimated 
800 American men in the 35-39 age group who will be diagnosed with 
colon and rectal cancer this year, according to figures provided by 
the American Cancer Society. The figure represents 1.2 percent of 
the estimated 64,000 American men who will develop colon cancer in 
1998. About 77,000 American women of all ages will also develop colon 
and rectal cancer. Yankees officials and Strawberry's wife, Charisse, 
have said that doctors have offered him a good prognosis on the basis 
of preliminary tests and are confident that he will be able to play 
next season. Strawberry said he has suffered abdominal cramping in 
recent weeks. The complaints led to a CAT scan X-ray that was performed 
Wednesday and other tests that detected what team officials said was 
a walnut-sized mass in his colon. The operation is expected to be 
performed by Dr. George Todd at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center 
in Manhattan. Charisse Strawberry said her husband would not need 
a colostomy, the creation of a new opening through the abdomen to 
eliminate wastes from the bowel. Doctors and Yankee officials have 
provided few specific details about Strawberry's case, but Yankees 
team physician Stuart Hershon said Friday that Strawberry's cancer 
was in a favorable location for removal from his colon. Crucial information 
will come during the operation when Todd is expected to remove the 
cancer and the segment of normal colon to either side of it. As is 
usual in such operations, Todd will also feel Strawberry's entire 
intestines, liver and other tissues for evidence of spread of the 
cancer. Also, pathologists will look through a microscope at the tissues 
removed in the operation. They include the cancer, adjacent segment 
of colon, and lymph nodes. Information from the surgical and pathological 
examinations will be used to classify, or stage, the cancer. There 
are several staging systems, and the category in Strawberry's case 
will depend on which one the Columbia doctors use. The staging information 
and pathology report will help determine what anti-cancer therapy 
Strawberry will need after he recuperates from the operation. If the 
cancer is at a relatively early stage, as described, the five-year 
survival rate is 92 percent, according to American Cancer Society 
statistics. But if the cancer has spread to nearby organs or lymph 
nodes, the five-year survival drops to 64 percent. The incidence of 
colon and rectal cancer rises sharply after age 50. Over all, colon 
cancer is second to lung cancer as the most common fatal cancer in 
the United States. Colon and rectal cancers are expected to account 
for 11 percent of new cases of cancer in this country this year. The 
47,700 estimated deaths from colon cancer will account for about 10 
percent of all the cancer deaths, cancer society statistics show. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>