<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
How can lower prices possibly be bad? Who, for example, is not pleased 
to buy a new car today for less than the same model cost a year ago? 
That isn't hypothetical. Prices really have dropped for some models. 
But beware: The cheerful experience of paying less today for a new 
car, or new shoes, or anything else may become a haunting experience 
tomorrow. The phenomenon in question is deflation, which means a general 
decline in prices. The word had become an antique from the Great Depression. 
But the spreading Asian crisis, plunging stock prices and excess capacity 
(more goods are produced than people will buy) are bringing deflation 
back into the language. Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, 
now uses the word, most recently declaring that ``deflation from the 
Far East is heading our way.'' And gradually deflation is becoming 
a familiar idea. Deflation is not yet happening in the United States. 
Prices are not falling across the board. But they are dropping for 
a growing number of goods. Cars are one example. So is some apparel, 
steel and fuel oil. The Consumer Price Index, covering both goods 
and services, continues to rise, at a very mild 1.6 percent a year. 
But the index for goods alone rose by only 0.2 percent in the 12 months 
ended in August, the smallest gain in nearly 40 years. Over the broad 
spectrum of goods and services, says Mark Blaug, an economic historian, 
``inflation is clearly converging toward zero.'' Zero inflation has 
a happy side. A small wage increase adjusted for nonexistent inflation 
represents a real improvement in buying power. Deflation can also 
be a happy experience, when the next new suit claims a smaller share 
of a month's wages than the last one did. But deflation, unfortunately, 
is not limited to falling prices. It can mean falling wages, too, 
and it becomes painful when incomes fall faster than prices. In fact, 
there is a good deflation and a bad deflation, and something in between. 
Good deflation was the American experience from 1870 until 1896. Prices 
fell almost every year, but wages and profits, instead of being squeezed 
out, climbed. The reason was rapidly rising productivity. In an era 
of rapid expansion and much new technology, the revenue each worker 
earned for his company rose despite falling prices. More money was 
available for both wages and profits, and both rose. Consider transportation. 
As railroads spread across the country, replacing horses, more freight 
and more passengers were moved longer distances, faster, through all 
seasons. Revenue per railroad worker rose while rates fell. The telephone 
brought a similar result in communications, and the Sears, Roebuck 
catalogue in retailing. ``The 19th-century deflation was productivity 
driven and the current deflation is not; it is driven by excess capacity 
around the world,'' said Jeffrey Madrick, who is writing a book on 
productivity. Various economists agree. Official statistics show little, 
if any, enduring improvement in the weak rate of productivity growth 
that has prevailed for 25 years. A few experts maintain that a new 
era of rising productivity has dawned that is not yet captured in 
the statistics. But these days, as prices fall or cease to rise, corporate 
profits have grown more slowly or disappeared entirely. Job growth 
has also subsided, and layoff announcements appear more frequently. 
Rising productivity does not seem to be saving the day. Does that 
mean the United States is condemned to experience the bad kind of 
deflation again? Not necessarily. The Depression featured the classic 
bad deflation. A stock market crash, unexpected bankruptcies, defaults, 
bank runs and bank failures dried up the credit on which any economy 
depends. With prices and wages falling rapidly, people and companies 
found themselves without enough income to repay debts. That produced 
more defaults, and even harder times. Something like that is happening 
in Asia today, and could spread to the United States. But having learned 
from the Depression, governments today have the policy tools and knowledge 
to prevent this. What's more, they know how to to get a stagnant economy 
moving again, by using big increases in government spending, if lower 
interest rates don't do the trick. If good deflation seems unlikely 
and bad deflation preventable, the in-between scenario could well 
develop. Prices would fall slowly, not swiftly, and corporate revenue 
would contract gradually, leaving less money for wages and profits. 
Without faster productivity growth, as Blaug put it, ``there will 
be increasing conflict between labor and management over who gets 
what share of the smaller pie.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>