<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When this city awoke to its first heroin epidemic just after World 
War I, the city Health Department lured addicts into treatment with 
the promise of free heroin. The nearly 8,000 addicts who responded 
were detoxified with diminishing doses of heroin. After they were 
pronounced cured, 9 out of 10 resumed chasing heroin. Health officials 
threw up their hands. ``They decided there was no point in treatment,'' 
said Dr. David Musto, a Yale University psychiatrist and medical historian. 
Eighty years later, methadone, which blocks heroin craving, is the 
preferred treatment for heroin addiction, though the notion of fighting 
one drug with another is still being debated. In New York City, 36,000 
people take methadone, whose effectiveness in stopping heroin use 
has been endorsed by no less than the National Institutes of Health. 
But as the White House drug policy director, Gen. Barry McCaffrey, 
spoke this week of making methadone more available, Mayor Rudolph 
Giuliani continued to insist that abstinence, not methadone, is the 
only solution for heroin addicts. Saying he wants to abolish the city's 
methadone clinics, the mayor derides methadone as no better than heroin. 
Medical specialists on both sides of the issue agree that methadone 
offers a limited solution to the intractability of addiction. Methadone, 
they say, has helped thousands of heroin addicts recover their lives, 
but it alone cannot transform them into productive citizens. ``We're 
debating whether it's all bad or all good,'' said Dr. Mitchell Rosenthal, 
the president of Phoenix House, a drug treatment network based in 
Manhattan that eschews methadone. The reality, he said, is more complex. 
Dr. Robert Newman, the president of Continuum Health Partners, a hospital 
consortium that includes Beth Israel Medical Center and St. Luke's-Roosevelt 
Hospital Center, said, ``What we see, not just in New York City, is 
the application of expectations regarding the treatment of addiction 
that would be unthinkable in the treatment of any other disease. ``When 
it comes to treating heroin addiction,'' Newman said, ``people demand 
that the treatment resolve all the other problems the heroin addict 
has.'' Methadone's origins go back to World War II, when German scientists 
synthesized it as a painkiller for casualties. In 1964, two medical 
researchers at what is now Rockefeller University, Dr. Vincent Dole 
and Dr. Marie Nyswander, started testing methadone on heroin addicts 
who had relapsed after other treatment. ``It was developed in New 
York, and the impetus to develop it was New York's heroin problem,'' 
said Dr. Mary Jeanne Kreek, the head of the Laboratory of the Biology 
of Addictive Diseases at Rockefeller University. Kreek assisted Drs. 
Dole and Nyswander in dispensing methadone to addicted felons. The 
researchers found that 100 milligrams of methadone blocked the effect 
of 200 milligrams _ equivalent to several highs _ of heroin. ``We 
found craving began to go away,'' Dr. Kreek recalled. ``Many wanted 
to go back to school, to work or back to their families.'' Methadone 
has several advantages. It affects the brain's receptors for 24 hours, 
blocking heroin's three-minute euphoric rush. Methadone can be taken 
orally and is medically nontoxic. Its slow onset, in dramatic contrast 
to heroin's spiky highs, eliminates mood swings, making an addict 
feel normal again. But methadone also creates a physical dependence 
that can be as strong as heroin addiction. While addicts say they 
get no kick from methadone, it can cause some euphoria in someone 
unaccustomed to opiates. Such potential risks have made methadone 
the most tightly controlled medication in the country. Drs. Dole and 
Nyswander never considered methadone a ``silver bullet'' for curing 
heroin addicts. ``We agreed that clearly they need behavioral treatment 
and counseling, but time and again these have been shown to have limited 
effectiveness,'' Dr. Kreek said. By 1970, the Nixon administration 
was promoting methadone to reduce crime, which dropped when addicts 
no longer had to finance a $200-a-day heroin habit. A simple dose 
of methadone costs $13 today. Confronted with a new heroin epidemic 
in New York, Mayor John V. Lindsay's health services administrator, 
Gordon Chase, recruited Newman in 1970 to open methadone programs 
throughout the city. Within a year, the city had 40 methadone clinics 
treating 12,000 addicts. During this period, the lower Manhattan detention 
center called the Tombs was overflowing with inmates, half of whom 
were addicted to heroin. Addicts crammed into cells on the prison's 
ninth floor were sometimes sprayed with water to ease their writhing 
through the nausea and muscle spasms of withdrawal, which last for 
several days. ``They were given two aspirins and a hose,'' recalled 
a former city official who spoke on the condition of anonymity. A 
violent riot in 1970 and a spate of suicides in 1971 attributed to 
heroin problems led the Department of Correction to ask Dole to detoxify 
the addicts. Over nine months, 22,000 inmates in city prisons were 
detoxified with methadone, and the prisons calmed down. ``A sympathetic 
response to the needs of human beings locked in cells can make the 
difference between a quiet prison and a riot,'' Dole wrote a year 
later, recounting his work in The Journal of the American Medical 
Association. Musto said that methadone became available at the very 
time that society was seeking a new approach to drug addiction. ``We 
were undergoing a change of attitude from seeing it as a criminal 
problem to seeing it as a medical problem,'' he said. But Drs. Dole 
and Dr. Nyswander also found that within two years after quitting 
methadone, 70 to 80 percent of the addicts they treated were using 
illicit opiates again. ``The goal was always methadone to abstinence,'' 
Dr. Kreek said, ``but we found relapse occurred.'' They introduced 
methadone maintenance as a longer-term solution. By April 1972, more 
than 16,000 heroin addicts were enrolled in methadone maintenance 
programs in the city. By 1975, the number had grown to 35,000. The 
Nixon administration's support of methadone as a crime-reducer led 
to suspicions among some black New Yorkers that the medication was 
a plot to render them docile. Dr. James Curtis, the chief psychiatrist 
at Harlem Hospital Center, said: ``Before the drug epidemic hit, Harlem 
was a secure, thriving community. When you added drugs on top of gangs, 
these neighborhoods became absolute wastelands of danger.'' When methadone 
was proposed, Curtis said, ``it seemed to me a very poor idea.'' Still, 
he had watched other drug treatment programs fail because their patients 
had relapsed. ``By the end of the year, you were lucky if you had 
5 percent of those who came,'' he said. Curtis found that one-third 
of those who joined methadone maintenance programs in Harlem stayed 
and turned their lives around. ``I was willing to conclude that 35 
percent was a whole lot better than 5 percent,'' he said. Today, barely 
one-third of methadone patients around New York City have found regular 
jobs. The failure of methadone programs to move addicts in treatment 
off welfare and into jobs is said to be one reason Mayor Giuliani 
declared war on methadone. ``You can't give a socially dysfunctional 
addict methadone and think he's going to develop table manners and 
develop social skills,'' Rosenthal said. Reports that methadone was 
being diverted at some clinics, sometimes to addicts who could not 
get into treatment, led to stringent controls that force most patients 
to appear daily and drink their medication on the spot. ``You had 
addicts coming out and selling their doses to undercover cops,'' said 
Robert Silbering, former special narcotics prosecutor for the city. 
``They saw it as a way of getting money to buy drugs.'' Dr. Edwin 
Salsitz, who runs a pilot methadone prescription program at Beth Israel 
Medical Center, said that methadone maintenance gets a bad name because 
of the chronic destitution of addicts. Changing patterns of drug abuse 
have highlighted methadone's limitations. Ninety percent of heroin 
addicts on the street also use cocaine, which methadone cannot block, 
though Dr. Kreek said the stability of the methadone regimen helps 
to discourage cocaine use. Rosenthal said that only 19 percent of 
admissions to Phoenix House primarily involve heroin. And the purity 
of heroin sold on the street has more than doubled since methadone 
was introduced, raising the methadone dose required to override it. 
Heroin's unprecedented purity has emboldened more affluent, younger 
users to snort it, making them future candidates for methadone treatment. 
Despite the criticism of methadone, few outside City Hall can envision 
New York City without it. ``The fact is that if you take 30,000 methadone 
patients and you stop their treatment, virtually all of them will 
be back on the streets shooting heroin,'' Newman said. ``And they'll 
be mugging and stealing to support their habit.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>