<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton on Friday proposed changing the International Monetary 
Fund's strategy so it can act earlier to help countries ward off economic 
crisis, rather than waiting until disaster strikes and when bailouts 
are more expensive and painful. Clinton's proposal came after a week 
of turmoil in world financial markets and growing fears that the IMF's 
severe shortage of money is paralyzing its ability to calm investors, 
who are pulling billions of dollars out of emerging market countries. 
However, the plan would only work if all member nations provide their 
full donation to the IMF, starting with the United States. Congress 
has not approved the $18 billion U.S. share. The plan does not call 
for new money to the IMF; rather, it would allow the IMF to spend 
some of that money differently. The move is motivated, Clinton said, 
by mounting evidence that this financial turmoil is threatening the 
United States. But details of the plan were left deliberately vague 
Friday, largely so that Europe and Japan can debate and perhaps alter 
it at a meeting Saturday of finance ministers and central bankers 
from the world's largest industrial economies. Their meeting will 
immediately precede a far larger annual meeting of the IMF and the 
World Bank, sessions that this year are focused on how to stop the 
global economic turmoil that many fear could trigger a worldwide recession. 
Clinton announced the plan Friday morning in a statement he read just 
before heading off to two fund-raisers, a hasty presentation that 
suggested the idea had been cobbled together quickly. Clinton said 
the U.S. proposal would ``provide contingent finance to help countries 
ward off global financial contagion.'' Later in the day, Treasury 
Secretary Robert Rubin, who developed the plan over the past week 
with Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, described the idea as 
a line of credit that the IMF could offer to countries that are basically 
economically sound but still vulnerable to investor panic. Though 
Rubin would not name any specific countries, the plan might apply 
to nations like Brazil, which despite taking bold measures to reform 
its economy has still been shaken by nervous investors pulling out 
their cash because they fear it could be the next victim of economic 
turmoil. The hope, U.S. officials said, is that the mere presence 
of the ``standby credit,'' akin to a guarantee from a rich relative 
that a newcomer to town will be able to pay the rent, will calm investors. 
``The idea is to create a precautionary credit line that wouldn't 
be dispersed unless it is really needed,'' said a senior Treasury 
official. Experts in international finance generally applauded the 
plan because it appears aimed at solving one of the IMF's greatest 
shortcomings: Right now it provides major aid to countries only after 
they are deep in trouble, and then usually with conditions _ chiefly 
austerity and high interest rates to bolster their currency _ that 
can trigger unemployment, recession and political backlash. But politically, 
the proposal may run into several problems. The plan would bring no 
new money into the IMF, whose coffers are badly depleted. It would 
only change the way the fund spends the money given by its 182 member 
nations. And right now, Clinton's commitment to provide $18 billion 
in new funding to the IMF is still stuck in Congress, after being 
overwhelmingly approved in the Senate and overwhelmingly rejected 
in the House. A conference committee is expected to decide in the 
next 10 days or so, but other countries will not contribute their 
shares, for a total of $90 to $100 billion in new money, until the 
United States acts. This puts Rubin in a precarious position at the 
meeting Saturday. He must press a plan that is bound to be met with 
some suspicion by Europe and Japan, at a time that the United States 
is not providing its share of the financing. Clinton alluded to this 
quandary Friday during his brief speech on the South Lawn, just two 
hours before the House Judiciary Committee released thousands of pages 
of grand jury testimony and other evidence in the Monica Lewinsky 
matter. The president said that ``in the few working days it has left 
this year, the most important thing Congress can do to protect our 
farmers, our ranchers, our businesses and our workers, is to secure 
full funding for the International Monetary Fund.'' This is the third 
time in two weeks that Clinton has spoken at length on the global 
financial crisis, after months of near-silence. His political aides 
say that it is time for the president to show a strong U.S. commitment 
to calming the chaos _ and, they add, it may well be good politics 
by focusing on the economy while the Congress seems consumed by its 
investigations. The administration refused to set any amount for this 
new line of credit for countries in economic danger, saying that will 
be part of the discussions over the next several days. Regardless 
of its size, new plan may help the White House sell IMF funding on 
Capitol Hill by arguing that it would make the Fund more agile and 
more sensitive to countries' domestic problems. But a fierce critic 
of the IMF funding on Capitol Hill, House Majority Leader Dick Armey, 
said he was unimpressed. ``We need to recognize that it was the Clinton 
administration's own policies that accelerated the financial collapse 
overseas that is threatening the U.S. economy today,'' he said in 
a statement Friday afternoon. ``If the president will not _ or, as 
yet another consequence of his diminished leadership, cannot _ bring 
about real changes in international financial institutions, then Congress 
must supply leadership in his place,'' he said, insisting that all 
IMF loans should have a one-year limit and the Fund be prevented from 
imposing multi-year economic reform plans. The theory behind the new 
approach is that the IMF can do more to contain economic contagion, 
and do it less expensively, if its acts well in advance of a crisis. 
But announcing the goal and designing the instrument are very different. 
Rubin noted in a press conference Friday that investors might feel 
more confident if they see that a country had resources to fall back 
on if they got in trouble, diminishing the likelihood of defaulting 
on its debt. That, of course, was the theory behind the first bailout 
of South Korea late last fall. The money proved insufficient, however, 
and a second infusion was required. It was also the theory behind 
providing $40 billion in commitments, including $3 billion in U.S. 
backup financing, to Indonesia. But the political chaos in Jakarta 
was so great that no amount of money from the IMF could stem the flight 
of capital from the country. Still, the U.S. proposal could help emerging 
market countries that have essentially sound economies and have enacted 
real economic reforms but are still caught up in what Rubin on Friday 
called the ``herd mentality'' that has led investors to pull their 
money out. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>