<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The hummingbirds will be leaving soon for their annual peregrination. 
They've been here since the lilacs bloomed in May. Possibly they arrived 
sooner, but lilac time is usually when I notice them. I hear hummingbirds 
before I see them. The noise of their tiny wings beating furiously 
as they flit from one flower to the next sounds like the sputtering 
engine of a distant dirt bike. It's a noise I hear often as the season 
progresses and the hummingbirds find each flower in its prime. They 
hover around the beard tongue in June, the impatiens in July, the 
Mexican sunflower in August. A garden's birds are a fine complement 
to its flowers and vegetables. Not even cornflowers can match the 
blue of an indigo bunting; no rose is as vividly red as a scarlet 
tanager. Even drab-color birds improve the landscape, like plants 
grown as a quiet background. There are birds in the garden all year, 
as there are evergreens to make a show when the herbaceous plants 
are dormant. But the arrival of spring's first robin is as eagerly 
awaited as the first jonquil, both being signs that winter has loosened 
its hold on the earth. A neighbor watches for the first barn swallow, 
in the belief that when the swallows arrive, frost will not visit 
again, and it is therefore safe to put out the tomato seedlings that 
have been getting spindly on the windowsill. Barn swallows have been 
known to be wrong on that count, but they are a welcome sight anyway, 
wheeling joyously behind the tractor and snapping up flying insects 
that the machine has disturbed. Where there are many barn swallows, 
there are few mosquitoes, which is reason enough to tolerate their 
mud nests in the barn eaves. When it's time to till a field for early 
peas and potatoes, the tractor will make a slight detour around the 
spot where a killdeer, a kind of plover, has constructed her nest 
on the ground. The killdeer likes to nest where the soil is well drained 
and exposed to the southern sun _ exactly the right spot for early 
garden crops _ so this annual conflict is inevitable. It would be 
almost impossible to detect the killdeer's nest, with its four brown-speckled 
eggs, except that the killdeer is very good at calling attention to 
it. She plants herself, shrieking like a harridan, in front of the 
tractor as it approaches the site. In the spring, the tractor toolbox 
includes a supply of small, orange flags to mark killdeer nests. In 
the summer, when the peas have all been picked and the field has been 
cleaned up for a fall crop of broccoli or turnips, there is likely 
to be a small section of pea trellis left standing. House wrens and 
sparrows like to build their nests in the pea trellis. This year, 
a house wren chose a pot of artemisia on a bench outside the greenhouse 
as a nesting site. The artemisia was supposed to be planted in the 
spring, next to a clump of day lilies in a new perennial bed. Watching 
the mother wren fuss over her brood and applauding as the last youngster 
teetered on the edge of the bench before launching into flight was 
worth the delay. Fall planting is good for perennials, anyway. Some 
birds are said to be pests in the garden, including crows and mockingbirds. 
It's true that crows will eat newly sown seeds, delighted to find 
their dinner so neatly arranged in a row, and mockingbirds are fond 
of berries. But the four-crow squadron that patrols my fields (the 
same birds every year) is a familiar part of the scenery, and mockingbirds 
keep me company in the winter, when most of their compatriots have 
fled to warmer locales. I don't begrudge them a share of the produce. 
A piece of netting over the newly seeded squash or ripening blueberries 
prevents large losses. More often, birds are allies in the garden 
and field, devouring quantities of insects and weed seeds. When the 
dandelions go to fluff, bright yellow finches come to gorge on the 
seeds, arriving in such numbers that it looks as if the dandelions 
have bloomed all over again. Robins work at ground level, gobbling 
up grubs and cutworms, and swallows handle aerial duties. In the evening, 
swallows fly low over the vegetable plants, brushing the leaves lightly 
with their wings, then bank sharply around to grab any leafhoppers 
thus dislodged. Kestrels, hawks and owls hunt down rodents, and turkey 
vultures _ so ungainly on the ground, so magnificently graceful riding 
a summer thermal in great, lazy circles _ do their part as scavengers. 
Like many other gardeners, I favor hummingbirds. Fearless in their 
pursuit of nectar, they fly right into the greenhouse through open 
vents, heading first, always, to the double red impatiens. This year 
a young hummer mistook the greenhouse poly cover for open sky, and 
stunned herself trying to fly through it. I carried her to a basket 
of impatiens, where in due time she regained her wits. When mother 
came looking for her, chirping anxiously, the youngster was well enough 
to fly away. To grow beautiful flowers and fine vegetables is a gardener's 
joy. But to hold an iridescent hummingbird in one's hand is an experience 
that is not likely to be repeated. That one, I hope, will return when 
the lilacs are next in bloom. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>