<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0298 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the second day, the thud of artillery and columns of smoke from 
burning villages were largely absent from much of Kosovo Province, 
leading Western officials to conclude that President Slobodan Milosevic 
of Yugoslavia had ordered his troops to halt obvious operations against 
separatist rebels. The eerie calm in places in central Kosovo that 
had been the scene of artillery fire, killings and looting just a 
few days ago suggested that Milosevic was anxious to fend off military 
action that has been threatened by NATO. But diplomatic observers, 
who tour the countryside on daily monitoring missions, said that in 
the last two weeks Milosevic's forces had completed punishing offensives 
against ethnic Albanian villagers and the rebels they support. Tens 
of thousands of ethnic Albanians became refugees in the period that 
began with a Serbian offensive in Podujevo, just northwest of the 
capital, Pristina, swung around to the Cicavica Mountains last week 
and ended among villages west of Suva Reka this week. The lack of 
obvious military action and the sightings of long convoys of tanks 
and personnel carriers apparently heading toward barracks this week 
still left uncertainties about the status of Belgrade's military forces, 
Western diplomats said. To forge a political settlement in Kosovo, 
where the Kosovo Liberation Army is seeking independence from Serbia, 
Washington has demanded that Milosevic withdraw the extra army and 
police units sent to fight the insurgents. Serbia is the dominant 
republic of Yugoslavia. Some units of the Serbian interior ministry's 
police appeared to have left Kosovo altogether, said the diplomatic 
observers, who come from the United States, the European Union and 
Russia. There were some ``minor'' movements of tanks and sporadic 
gunfire and shooting in some places around Suva Reka Saturday, they 
said. On main roads and dirt tracks from Pristina to the towns of 
Mitrovica and onto Klina Friday checkpoints were much freer. Places 
that had been sealed by the military were open. Army tanks and armored 
personnel carriers were not visible. In Mitrovice, the ethnic Albanian 
deputy chairman of the local branch of the Council for Human Rights 
in Kosovo, Halid Berani, said that in the last two days he had received 
no reports of shelling and only a few incidents of shooting in the 
Cicavica Mountains. The Serbian police were still in the region, he 
said. But they appeared to have established temporary posts and were 
not on the move. On Monday, the Serbian government declared victory 
against the Kosovo Liberation Army, and a group of Serbian paramilitary 
forces paraded through Pristina in a convoy of trucks. Since then, 
there have been continuing announcements by the Serbian authorities 
of the return of various kinds of police units and army personnel 
to barracks. The state-run Yugoslav news agency Tanyug said ``anti-terrorist'' 
police units returned to their bases on Wednesday and Thursday. But 
the authorities have also stressed that they have the right to retaliate 
against any ``terrorist'' attack from the insurgents. As well as issuing 
threats of military force against Milosevic, Western officials have 
appealed to him to take measures that would encourage ethnic Albanian 
refugees to return to their villages. An estimated 250,000 ethnic 
Albanians in Kosovo have been forced from their homes since March. 
And up to 50,000 are still in the outdoors, too intimidated by the 
presence of the Serbian police around their villages to go home, relief 
officials say. Here in the village of Dobrovode, only one family has 
dared to come back. The other houses, burnt and shattered by shells, 
remained empty Friday. On the hill above the center of the village, 
a family of three brothers, their wives, 13 children and a grandmother 
were cleaning up the debris left in their three-story house from shells 
that hit on Aug. 2. The men of the family refused to give their last 
name, saying that as the lone returnees they still felt vulnerable 
to attack from the Serbian police. They had been camping since the 
attack on the village but returned Monday, they said, pulling up to 
the house with a tractor and large wooden trailer packed with possessions 
they had transferred to the forest. Much of the furniture in the house, 
built with the proceeds of money earned by Binak, 38, as a builder 
in Switzerland, had been destroyed. The middle floor of the house 
was burned, and only a few windows were still intact. His herd of 
sheep had been stolen by the Serbian forces and eaten at their temporary 
headquarters in the village school, Binak said. But the roof of the 
house was intact, and Binak said he wanted to restore the rooms before 
winter. His return did not signify the end of the conflict in Kosovo, 
he said. ``If the war was over,'' he said, ``all the villagers would 
be back and normal life would return.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>