<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0414 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A coalition of business, labor and farm groups called the Global Climate 
Information Project has been sponsoring two television commercials 
for the last month opposing an agreement reached in Kyoto, Japan, 
last December to reduce emissions of industrial waste gases believed 
to cause global warming. One commercial is a 30-second spot called 
``In Common.'' PRODUCER Goddard Claussen ON THE SCREEN A pair of scissors 
slices developing countries like India, Algeria, Thailand, Mexico 
and Brazil out of the world map. In a broader shot, the entire Third 
World dissolves to white. THE SCRIPT Female voice: ``The United Nations 
climate treaty cuts 134 countries out of the picture. Together, these 
countries' greenhouse gas emissions are growing five times faster 
than the rest of the world's, and the U.N.'s treaty will allow them 
to produce even more. So while America and a few other countries are 
forced to drastically cut energy use, countries like China, India 
and Mexico will continue to produce even more emissions. This U.N. 
treaty isn't global, and it won't work.'' ACCURACY All 175 countries 
that have ratified the 1992 U.N. climate treaty are obligated, in 
general, to control emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide, 
which is produced by the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil. 
But 39 industrialized nations including the United States, meeting 
in Kyoto, added a provision to the treaty that requires them to make 
specific cuts in emissions totaling about 5 percent below 1990 levels 
during the next 10 to 14 years. These 39 countries now produce most 
of the world's greenhouse emissions, even though poorer countries' 
emissions are growing and may exceed those of the richer countries 
in a decade or two. The poorer countries, arguing that the rich countries 
got wealthy by burning fossil fuels, have long refused to bind themselves 
to specific cuts until the richer countries lead the way. It is not 
clear that the Kyoto accord would require America to cut energy use 
drastically; many experts believe that eliminating energy waste by 
using fuel more efficiently would go far toward achieving the cuts. 
SCORECARD Many of the commercial's sponsors fear that they would be 
hurt by action to reduce emissions, and they are trying to convince 
viewers that the Kyoto agreement would be unfair and costly to Americans. 
The American Automobile Manufacturers Association took the lead in 
organizing the campaign, according to Karen Kerrigan, the sponsoring 
coalition's chairwoman. Among the reasons the spot is running now, 
she said, are these: Delegates from around the world are to meet in 
Buenos Aires, Argentina, in November to try to work out details of 
the Kyoto accord. The Kyoto agreement must still be approved by the 
Senate. (It has not yet been submitted by the White House.) And the 
Clinton administration has recently been lobbying for urgent action 
to control emissions in the face of rising global temperatures. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>