<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The lower house of Japan's Parliament on Friday took a major step 
toward stabilizing Japan's frail banking system, passing legislation 
that is also expected to improve the prospects for Japanese economic 
recovery. The legislation, which could pass the Upper House and become 
law as early as next Friday, has been the focus of worldwide attention 
because of the pivotal role Japan could play in influencing the direction 
of the global economy. Despite complaints from around the world, Japanese 
politicians have been bickering for months over this legislation as 
the economy, the world's second largest, suffers its worst recession 
since the end of World War II. The markets were not overwhelmed; even 
though the bill's eventual passage appeared certain, stock prices 
in Tokyo briefly touched yet another 12-year low Friday morning. But 
some officials say that the bills passed Friday night in the lower 
house, the key legislative body, will help Japan chart a way out of 
its bad debt problems and confront the sensitive issue of how to deal 
with the country's largest and weakest financial institutions. ``This 
is an epoch-making incident,'' said Naoto Kan, the leader of the Democratic 
Party, the main opposition group. The legislation, however, still 
faces challenges, and the economy will need more prodding before it 
improves. The government says it expects the economy to contract by 
1.8 percent in the year ending March 31, 1999, and senior U.S. officials 
have renewed their calls for Japan to strengthen its financial system 
and stimulate growth. Business sentiment is still gloomy, and worrying 
economic statistics keep piling up. The number of jobless in August 
rose to 2.97 million people, the largest number on record, and brought 
the level of unemployment back up to its June level of 4.3 percent, 
according to statistics released Friday. If unemployment figures were 
calculated by U.S. methods, the percentage would be considerably higher. 
Thursday, the Bank of Japan released its closely watched quarterly 
corporate survey, which suggested that capital spending could continue 
falling and that companies were encountering difficulties borrowing 
from the nation's banks. Even as the legislation passed the lower 
house Friday, politicians were snapping at each other. ``The fact 
that this law was made based on the opposition proposal is proof that 
the direction that the current Cabinet has been taking has not been 
the right one,'' Kan said. The governing Liberal Democrats were relieved 
by the approval Friday, but shot back a response to Kan: ``We shouldn't 
talk about who won or who lost or who conceded or who pushed through,'' 
said Yoshiro Mori, the secretary general of the Liberal Democratic 
Party, the majority group. The legislation, the result of weeks of 
intense negotiations, was drawn up rapidly on the basis of proposals 
from a group of opposition parties. The centerpiece is a three-way 
strategy to manage an orderly disappearance of failed banks. Such 
banks may be temporarily nationalized, liquidated under a bankruptcy 
administrator, or turned into a publicly owned bridge bank that would 
separate out the good loans and good borrowers and sell or collect 
on the bad loans. Another crucial element of the legislation will 
be the creation of a new ministry-level financial committee to deal 
with bank failures and draft plans to manage financial turmoil. Until 
this new committee is formed, the prime minister will be endowed with 
these powers. There were suggestions in the Japanese media earlier 
Friday that the Finance Ministry would also play a role in these areas, 
but with passage Friday night in the lower house, few details were 
released. One of the most debated issues has been the power of the 
Finance Ministry. The opposition has demanded that the ministry be 
stripped of some powers, but it has vociferously fought back. The 
ministry is expected to lose some of its financial policy-making authority 
by the year 2000, but the debate on this point has not yet ended. 
A law passed earlier this year to inject taxpayers' money into weakly 
capitalized Japanese banks would also be abolished by the new financial 
bills, and politicians will begin creating a new plan to replace it. 
Friday's legislation also calls for creating a U.S.-style agency, 
similar to the Resolution Trust Corp. that helped clean up the savings 
and loan crisis in the United States, to expedite the disposal of 
more than $600 billion in bad bank debts. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>