<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mount Charleston rises high above Las Vegas, just an hour's drive 
north of the gambling hothouses on the fabled Strip, but a world apart 
in spirit. At 9,000 feet, a clear mountain stream called Deer Creek 
tumbles between towering ponderosa pines and aspens _ Las Vegas shimmering 
like a mirage in the dusty valley below. Yet the two places are intimately 
tied together. The land on the mountainside was saved from development 
in a deal that helped Las Vegas grow. And that transaction put Deer 
Creek at the center of a web of questions and accusations, culminating 
in September in the release of a government audit that has caused 
a re-examination of one of the West's most popular methods for preserving 
the environment amid rapid growth. In the early 1990s, the land at 
the headwaters of Deer Creek was privately owned and had already begun 
to be developed into vacation homes. That is when an environmental 
group, the American Land Conservancy, offered to buy most of it in 
a complicated deal. The plan was for a land exchange. The conservancy 
would buy Deer Creek, along with other environmentally sensitive land 
in Nevada, and then give it to the United States Forest Service, saving 
it from development. In return, the government would turn over federal 
property on the outskirts of Las Vegas, which the conservancy would 
sell to developers. Land at both ends of the deal would be used more 
appropriately than it could have been before, and the conservancy, 
after putting up the money for options and appraisals and acting as 
the go-between, would be repaid and gain a margin of 10 percent or 
so to cover its costs and help its operations. Deals like this one 
have become common in the West in the last decade, impelled in part 
by the increasing unwillingness of Congress to appropriate funds that 
would allow the government to buy land outright for conservation. 
But Deer Creek showed what could go wrong. The federal audit determined 
that the government had given up land worth $5.9 million more than 
the value of what it got back. Discrepancies were also found in other 
Nevada exchanges. The supervisor of the largest national forest in 
the nation was accused of taking gifts from participants in the Deer 
Creek deal and has retired. And in the backlash, land exchanges around 
the country have been slowed almost to a standstill as the Forest 
Service reviews proposed deals and scrambles to overhaul its procedures 
and provide better oversight. The agency will continue to work with 
third parties like the American Land Conservancy, said James Lyons, 
under Secretary of Agriculture for natural resources and the environment, 
but will deal with them more carefully. ``They've been key partners,'' 
Lyons said. ``We welcome the help and support, but just because an 
organization has the label of a nonprofit doesn't mean they don't 
have to be viewed in an arm's-length way.'' Like many Western cities, 
Las Vegas is surrounded by federal lands managed by either the Forest 
Service, which is in the Department of Agriculture, or the Bureau 
of Land Management, a part of the Department of the Interior. This 
land is usually waterless or otherwise ill suited to agriculture and 
was never turned over to settlers under the homestead acts of the 
last century. But now, as Western cities expand, there is growing 
pressure to get much of it out of federal hands and free it for development. 
In land exchanges, the government can give up land while getting something 
of value for the public in return. Some environmentalists would surely 
argue that the intangible quality of conservation is not easily measured 
against market value. But to avoid unfair profiteering at the public's 
expense, the government's mandate in land exchanges is to come out 
even in purely financial terms. Land is to be exchanged for land of 
equal value, as set by real estate appraisers. When the private parties 
in an exchange get more credit for land than it is worth, as the auditors 
say happened with Deer Creek, the public is the loser, said Charles 
Hancock, a retired chief appraiser for the Bureau of Land Management 
in Nevada and a persistent critic of land exchanges. ``You always 
have managers who believe the end justifies the means,'' Hancock said. 
``You have people who think, `This is the most valuable piece of real 
estate in the world for our program,' but the market doesn't support 
it.'' And as Hancock also says and the history of Deer Creek shows, 
some players in these deals have opportunities for personal profits 
as well. The Deer Creek exchange had its roots in northern Nevada, 
where the American Land Conservancy, at the urging of environmentalists 
and the state's congressional delegation, secured an option in 1993 
to buy a 3,864-acre mountain property near Reno. Developers had been 
planning to use it for ski runs, condominiums and a casino-hotel. 
The conservancy proposed an exchange of the property, the Galena Resort, 
for federal land near Las Vegas. But the Nevada congressional delegation 
urged the conservancy's president, Harriet Burgess, to add some other 
land to the deal to provide an environmental benefit to southern Nevada, 
too. Ms. Burgess sent Lauren Ward, a consultant and real estate agent 
who worked with the conservancy, to Las Vegas to meet with Jan Bernard, 
the president and one of 12 shareholders of Pine Development, which 
owned Deer Creek. Ms. Bernard was a real estate agent, and the conservancy 
was also considering working with her on transactions involving the 
Las Vegas properties it was about to acquire in the exchange. Pine 
Development had bought 524 acres at Deer Creek for $2 million and 
had subdivided 76 acres and sold 15 lots for a total of $1.6 million. 
Ms. Bernard agreed to the idea of selling the conservancy options 
on the remaining 448 acres. But a conflict soon developed over price. 
A private appraiser who was also evaluating the Las Vegas land valued 
the Deer Creek property at $12.5 million. Forest Service appraisers 
rejected that as too high, and the Galena exchange went forward in 
August 1994 without Deer Creek. By this time the exchange had grown, 
and it had also become unbalanced. The federal government got Galena 
and several properties around Nevada, valued at a total of $35 million. 
The land conservancy got scattered parcels near Las Vegas worth $46 
million. The lopsided amounts were permissible under the Federal Land 
Exchange Facilitation Act of 1988, which allows an exchange assembled 
from scattered parcels to be out of balance by up to 25 percent. But 
the imbalance must be corrected within three years, and in this case 
the land conservancy had to find a way to make up its $11 million 
deficit. Deer Creek quickly emerged as the favored solution to both 
that problem and the congressional delegation's demand for conservation 
land near Las Vegas. But negotiations faltered when government appraisers 
put the value of Deer Creek at only $4.6 million and Ms. Bernard threatened 
to withdraw Pine Development and develop the land. Sen. Richard H. 
Bryan, a Democrat representing Nevada in Washington, urged all the 
players to reach a deal. Federal appraisers were not at the table 
when Forest Service officials agreed to value the property at $10.5 
million, more than double the government appraisal. Deer Creek changed 
hands in March 1996. The land conservancy had already sold the Las 
Vegas properties it had acquired in the exchange to developers, in 
most cases making up to a 16 percent markup. In addition to what she 
was paid as a shareholder in Pine Development, Ms. Bernard made $1.3 
million as a real estate agent in those transactions, working with 
Ward, the land conservancy's consultant. He was paid a similar amount: 
they split the commissions, earning 3 percent each. That might have 
been the end of the matter. But Paul Tittman, the chief appraiser 
for the Forest Service in Washington, soon filed a complaint. He charged 
that the Deer Creek transaction had ``all the makings of either scandal 
or incompetence in managing the public's resources'' and accused the 
service's Nevada staff of ``appraisal shopping in an effort to meet 
the expectations of the property owners.'' ``Their zeal to make a 
deal has undermined the entire exchange program.'' Tittman wrote. 
The complaint set off the federal audit, which was conducted by the 
office of the inspector general in the Department of Agriculture. 
Besides determining that the government had lost nearly $15 million 
in the Deer Creek exchange and three others, the audit found that 
Jim Nelson, supervisor of the Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest and 
the highest-ranking Forest Service official in Nevada, had received 
gifts from parties in the Deer Creek deal, including a day's sailing 
on San Francisco Bay with Ms. Burgess and a stay at a ski condominium 
owned by Ward. Nelson has now retired. The Inspector General identified 
``a serious breakdown of controls in all phases'' of land exchanges. 
The audit said the Forest Service had allowed ``private parties (landowners 
and third-party facilitators) to exert undue influence over the direction 
and outcome of almost all large-value exchanges'' in the national 
forest land near Las Vegas and had compromised the independence of 
Forest Service appraisers by ``allowing private parties to repeatedly 
challenge their valuations and by criticizing the appraisers' work.'' 
Nelson, who in a 34-year career acquired a reputation for vigorously 
protecting public lands, defends his role in the land exchanges. If 
he had not intervened, he said, not only Deer Creek but also a number 
of other deals would not have happened, because government appraisers 
had not personally liked them. At a meeting on one exchange, Nelson 
said, ``I was embarrassed to sit there because of the hostility of 
our appraisers.'' As for the sailing trip and other gifts, Nelson 
said, ``I did this stuff with people that I had worked with and become 
very good friends with over the years.'' He stressed the importance 
of the results of his work. ``We've saved a lot of land for future 
generations and for the public to enjoy,'' he said. But an environmental 
group run by current and former Forest Service employees expresses 
concern that deals like the one at Deer Creek could undermine the 
cause of public stewardship. The group, Forest Service Employees for 
Environmental Ethics, leaked a draft of the audit before its release. 
``When you are a federal employee and trusted with the management 
of billions of dollars of public assets,'' Andy Stahl, president of 
the group, said, ``your hands have to be scrupulously clean or the 
public will lose trust in you and the agency.'' Since reviewing the 
Deer Creek audit, the Agriculture Department has ordered the Forest 
Service ``to put all third-party transactions on hold,'' Lyons said, 
and land exchanges are now being reviewed ``case by case.'' The agency 
had been relying increasingly on third parties like the land conservancy 
because its nationwide appraisal staff has been cut from 160 to 60 
people in the last decade, Lyons said. Meanwhile, meteoric growth 
in the West is increasing pressure to complete land exchanges. The 
Forest Service now plans to hire more appraisers and conduct training 
on how to work more cautiously with organizations like the conservancy. 
``One of the messages we've sent is to recognize that they are in 
the business of land transactions and we need to treat them as businesses,'' 
Lyons said. ``We need to closely watch the bottom line so the taxpayers 
and the public truly benefit.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>