<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than a year ago, when what is now looking very much like a global 
financial crisis was primarily an Asian phenomenon, the conventional 
wisdom was that Europe and the United States were strong enough economically 
to help the world ride out the problem. Of course, that was before 
Russia's default eviscerated Latin America's ability to borrow. It 
was before Long Term Capital cratered. And it was before companies 
started to acknowledge, as Northern Telecom did last week, that sales 
on the continent would likely not meet expectations. Robert D. Hormats, 
vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International who was an assistant 
secretary of State for economic and business affairs in the Reagan 
administration, spent some time last week talking about Europe, and 
whether the twin-pillar theory of global stability was still operative. 
Q. (italics)European markets got creamed last week. Are things starting 
to unravel, or was Europe due for a correction?(end italics) A. Europe's 
markets have performed extremely well over the last couple of years, 
and for a variety of reasons. First, European Monetary Union has cemented 
things together. Many countries have benefited from falling interest 
rates. And many countries are undergoing the kind of industrial restructuring 
that took place in the United States during the late 1980s and early 
1990s. Q. (italics)Many European economies were moribund in the early 
1990s. The last few years have been better. What about 1999?(end italics) 
A. European economies will grow around 3 percent this year, following 
a 2.5 percent rate of increase in 1997. We think there will be some 
weakening next year, but the growth will be marginally higher than 
in the United States. A drop in net exports won't help, but domestic 
demand in Europe will be enough to offset much of that. The fundamentals 
of Europe's economy and currency are pretty sound. Europe's real challenge 
is to address the structural problems of its social safety net, which 
is very expensive to maintain. Q. (italics)Last week the Federal Reserve 
cut interest rates. The Germans have said they have no intention of 
following the Fed's lead. Is that likely to change when the European 
Central Bank swings into action next year?(end italics) A. With inflation 
running at a little over 1 percent this year, and just a bit more 
in 1999, there probably is room to lower interest rates. But the new 
central bank probably won't cut rates. Over time, if the international 
situation worsens and if growth in this country falls, then it clearly 
will put more pressure on the European Central Bank to lower rates. 
But I don't think they will move quickly. I think they will need to 
see a real weakening in order books before they do. Q. (italics)In 
light of all the turmoil, is now a dangerous time to move to a common 
currency?(end italics) A. Not at all. If this crisis had occurred 
10 years ago, there would have been a great deal of volatility among 
European currenices. EMU has been a stabilizing force for their currencies, 
particularly the southern European countries'. Q. (italics)Do you 
see any evidence of a credit crunch in Europe?(end italics) A. There 
are not many signs of a credit contraction yet, but it is an interesting 
dimension to consider. When the Asian crisis began, the general view 
was that it would have an effect by reducing exports. That has been 
true. But so many investors have lost money in general that it has 
created an enormous aversion to risk and pumped up premiums in the 
safest assets. That is where the concern about a slowdown in this 
country, and to a degree in Europe, is going to be focused for some 
time. Q. (italics)The Clinton administration is having an enormously 
hard time getting Congress to approve an $18 billion increase for 
the International Monetary Fund. Are Europeans worried about the consequences 
if that package doesn't pass?(end italics) A. The view I pick up is 
that few in Europe are happy with the IMF, either. But they are beginning 
to worry about America's leadership capability, and a vote against 
this would signal that the administration and the Congress can't agree 
on much of anything, particularly on something as important to international 
financial markets. But the negative symbolism would be almost as important 
as the loss of the money. Q. (italics)Do you still subscribe to the 
notion that Europe and the United States can carry the rest of the 
world through this?(end italics) A. The United States and Europe can 
grow at reasonable rates, but the risks are clearly on the downside. 
Therefore, there is more dependence on central banks than previously, 
because fiscal policy doesn't move quickly enough; they will be shouldering 
the bulk of the responsibility for sustaining growth over the next 
few quarters. If there is an expectation that Europe or the United 
States will slump into recession, that will add to the problems in 
the emerging markets. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>