<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Having decisively defeated Chancellor Helmut Kohl in Germany's national 
election last Sunday, Gerhard Schroeder and his Social Democratic 
Party began defining their new government Friday by opening coalition 
talks with the environmentalist Green Party. Though both parties say 
they want to form a governing coalition in parliament, the negotiations 
could prove prickly because the two sides disagree on many issues, 
including tax reform and nuclear energy. The Greens, who remain split 
between pragmatists and staunch environmentalists, have never been 
part of a governing coalition. Though popular among many young professional 
voters, the party infuriated mainstream political leaders during the 
campaign by calling for a huge new gasoline tax. Some of its members 
in parliament also created a furor by opposing Germany's taking part 
in NATO peacekeeping efforts in Bosnia. In the coalition talks, which 
both sides hope to finish by Oct. 17, the two parties must commit 
themselves to a common set of legislative goals as well as the allocation 
of Cabinet seats. The Greens have demanded four Cabinet seats, though 
Schroeder is believed to want to give them only two. Political leaders 
generally assume that Joschka Fischer, the Greens' popular and pragmatic 
leader in parliament, will become foreign minister. Juergen Trittin, 
the Greens' more ideological and leftist party chairman, is expected 
to be named environmental minister. Although the Greens have deep 
roots in the anti-military movement of the 1970s and early 1980s, 
neither Fischer nor Schroeder is expected to change Germany's foreign 
policy. Fischer is a strong supporter of Germany's role in NATO's 
peacekeeping forces. The more serious clashes are over taxes and nuclear 
energy. The Green Party is pushing a stiff new ``ecology'' tax on 
oil and gasoline to reduce the use of cars and trucks and to pay for 
a reduction in individual taxes and social security payments. Schroeder 
has said he will support only a modest increase in the fuel tax of 
several cents per liter. ``There will be no crazy demands or unacceptable 
burdens on motorists who rely on their cars to get to work,'' said 
Franz Muentefering, the Social Democratic Party's campaign manager. 
``Certainly the cost of labor has to be decreased and the cost of 
energy increased. But there will be no extremes.'' The Social Democrats 
want to protect Germany's generous social programs and push through 
a moderate tax reform that would that would close many loopholes and 
lighten the burden on middle- and lower-income workers. Another dispute 
is over abandoning nuclear energy, which still contributes a big share 
of Germany's electricity. The Greens have called for shutting down 
all nuclear plants within 10 years, and the issue is central to many 
party members. But Schroeder wants no firm deadline and has hinted 
that the process might need to last 20 years or more. As they emerged 
from long meetings Friday in Bonn, party leaders portrayed the talks 
as harmonious and businesslike. If all goes according to plan, the 
two sides said they would sign a formal agreement on Oct. 22. Schroeder 
hopes to take office by Oct. 27. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>