<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981002.0370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The House Judiciary Committee on Friday released the final mass of 
evidence in its consideration of impeachment charges against President 
Clinton, offering a pungent store of furtive tapes and grand jury 
delvings into Clinton's intimate relationship with a White House intern. 
The release of the 4,600 pages of heavily redacted testimony and transcripts 
featured Linda Tripp's 20 hours of secret voice recordings of the 
intern, Monica Lewinsky _ the seedbed tapes of the extraordinary criminal 
investigation into the presidential misbehavior with Ms. Lewinsky 
that Clinton denied before the nation for seven months. The White 
House, braced for an all-out impeachment struggle with the Republican-controlled 
Congress, immediately denounced this third release of evidence by 
Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, as ``the clearest indication 
that this is a partisan process designed for partisan gain'' and one 
far afield from the constitutional requirement for impeachment. To 
make that point, the president's lawyers submitted an argument for 
the House's consideration that reached back 200 years into the history 
of sex and politics and cited as precedent the Congress' early refusal 
to impeach Alexander Hamilton after he paid off a blackmailer who 
threatened to disclose Hamilton's sexual peccadilloes. The 105th Congress 
should be no less tolerant in the case of Clinton's behavior, the 
30-page brief argued. The document release ranged from the tiniest 
details _ even their sighs _ in the Tripp-Lewinsky confidences, to 
hard bouts of lawyerly combat in the grand jury room between prosecutors 
and the dozens of Clinton supporters subpoenaed as the president found 
himself targeted. ``Tell the grand jury all the conversations you 
had with the president of the United States about Monica Lewinsky 
since January, 12, 1998. How's that?'' one prosecutor demanded testily 
of Bruce Lindsay, deputy White House counsel. Lindsay, the president's 
closest, most tight-lipped confidante, stolidly refused to answer. 
While devoid of major new disclosures, the new material details the 
wide net thrown by the Whitewater independent counsel, Starr, in trying 
to make the case to Congress that the president should be impeached 
because he allegedly committed perjury and tampered with witnesses 
in his attempt to keep the Lewinsky affair private. Clinton, on a 
fund-raising visit to Cleveland, observed that everyone has to live 
with the consequences of mistakes in life. ``Most of us don't have 
to live with it in quite such a public way,'' he said as donors laughed 
in amusement and the new disclosures flooded the nation. The densely 
packed three-volume release, including the testimony of dozens of 
the president's staff and political associates, was laced with second-hand 
accountings of the president's personal life and glimpses of the White 
House's extensive attempts to foil Starr in his mission. The material 
was the prelude to the committee's public meeting next Monday, when 
the Republican majority is widely expected to recommend a formal House 
impeachment inquiry. The new evidence hardly settled the impeachment 
question as Clinton's critics and defenders each claimed material 
supporting their contentions. But the voluminous material confirmed 
the White House scandal as a heated farrago of personal, legal and 
political clashes that has put Clinton's incumbency at risk. The welter 
of documentation includes: _ The repeated attempts of Ms. Tripp, Ms. 
Lewinsky's erstwhile friend, to use her mentoring role to coach the 
younger woman _ even using the collective `we'' in strategizing at 
some points. ``I think you should say, `Well, I really need to speak 
to the big creep,' '' Ms. Tripp advised in one taped exchange, referring 
to the Ms. Lewinsky's nickname for the president. _ The possibility 
of gleaning the Tripp-Lewinsky tapes for exculpatory material as much 
as indicting comments. In the one tape-recording Ms. Tripp made secretly 
for Starr last January, she asked Ms. Lewinsky a key question in the 
prosecutors' attempt to discover evidence of presidential perjury: 
``What is the definition of sex?'' On the tape, Ms. Lewinsky replied, 
``Intercourse.'' She added, echoing Clinton's later defense to the 
grand jury and the nation, ``I never had intercourse. I did not have 
a sexual relationship.'' _ The repeated grand jury questionings in 
which the recollections of Betty Currie, the president's secretary 
who facilitated Ms. Lewinsky's Oval Office visits, grew less and less 
distinct. ``My memory is a little better _ but not much,'' she told 
the jury after a consultation with her lawyer. _ The urgent dawning 
in the White House last Jan. 17, after the president was deposed in 
the Paula Corbin Jones sexual misconduct civil suit, that Starr was 
hotly pursuing Ms. Lewinsky as a witness in some larger criminal inquiry 
directed against the president. ``Do you think you can reach Monica, 
see what's happening?'' Clinton asked Mrs. Currie after his deposition. 
Upon tracking down Ms. Lewinsky, the secretary said the normally loquacious 
intern hung up the phone after declaring, ``I can't talk to you.'' 
_ The combativeness of the president's loyalists in the face of Starr 
prosecutors. ``I'm just not going to answer that,'' Vernon E. Jordan 
Jr., the president's close friend snapped when asked whether he was 
misled by the president's distinctions about sexual conduct. ``You 
seem to have the problem with oral sex,'' he told the prosecutor. 
``I don't.'' Already split along partisans lines even before voting 
on its own inquiry, the committee now has a wealth of submissions 
from Starr, including Ms. Lewinsky's testimony admitting to oral sex 
with the president, and Clinton's own four hours of grand jury testimony 
broadcast to the nation last month. In that, he criticized Starr's 
inquiry as little more than a politically driven ``parsing of the 
definition of sex.'' Clinton maintains that because his behavior with 
Ms. Lewinsky involved oral sex and not full intercourse, he did not 
commit perjury in his Jones lawsuit deposition last January when he 
denied a sexual relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. After confirming a 
relationship before the grand jury, the president also finally told 
the nation on Aug. 17, contending his earlier denials were legally 
accurate though generally misleading. The document release revealed 
the grand jury testimony of a panoply of witnesses, from some of the 
highest presidential counsels to Secret Service agents who guard the 
president's life. There were exceptions, notably the testimony of 
Kathleen Willey, a White House volunteer who charged that the president 
once sexually groped her. Starr has previously said his office was 
continuing to look into possible obstruction of justice in the reaction 
to her charge by unnamed Clinton defenders. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>