<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981002.2000.0580 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The military analyst Pearce Wood isn't so sure the threat of force 
will get the Serbian leader out of Kosovo. Colonel Wood, who spent 
28 years in the U.S. Army, including a year in Vietnam as an artillery 
commander, says even NATO air strikes wouldn't necessarily get the 
job done. Now what you can do with air campaign is that you can slow 
down, slow down the Serb Army. You can degrade the efficiency of their 
operations. You can cause them to take evasive measures that make 
their life very, very difficult, but you can't stop people from the 
air. You can't stop military operations. You can't destroy ground 
formations from the air. There are just too many low tech ways to 
circumvent attack from the air. One of them is a shovel. Just dig 
deeply enough and you can get under cover and protect yourself from 
air attack until the airplanes are gone. And the airplanes, of course, 
can't be there 24 hours a day, so you operate when they're not there. 
And what about civilian casualties on the ground among those in Serbia? 
To what extent do you think the civilians there should be concerned? 
I know every member of the NATO military from General Clark all the 
way down to the pilots in the cockpits are going to be trying to prevent 
civilian casualties on the ground. And we have a greater capability 
of doing so now in the 1990s than we ever did since 1945 on. But we're 
still not perfect. We're still going to have drop what are called 
iron bombs, dumb bombs, to get this job done in a massive air campaign 
free of casualties to us. And that's going to cause some collateral 
casualties. It's random and capricious and could happen anytime, anywhere, 
and I don't think we should kid ourselves going into this thing that 
we're not going to take some really horrific civilian casualties on 
the ground. I mean, that's what warfare is about and that's why I 
want the American people to hear about this thing is don't do this 
thing unless you really think it's serious enough for some really 
tragic consequences. And clearly, it sounds as if you don't think 
it's serious enough. I certainly don't. And what other... This is 
a counter insurgency operation inside a sovereign state. Do you want 
to set the example that insurgence anywhere in any sovereign state 
in the world can rebel against their government and they'll get help 
from NATO if we like them? It's a bad precedent. I know that Serbians 
are bad act on the international scene, but as an historian, from 
a historical perspective, this is really an incredible precedent that 
we're setting. Doesn't the United States have some kind of moral obligation 
to act to curb these atrocities? no. Why not? The American people 
are paying a very serious - enduring a very serious tax burden, you 
know, more than anyone else in the world. We're the biggest spender 
in the world, $271 billion for their national defenses. And I really 
don't think the American people, when they write those checks to the 
Internal Revenue Service, think that they are paying for a defense 
to protect the lives of every one on the planet. So do you think that 
there is some kind of appropriate use of United States military might 
in this case? Yeah, to defend the United States against attack, and 
to defend our national interest against aggression. And how about 
this case in Kosovo? Well, I'm still waiting for somebody to tell 
me what the United States national interests are in Kosovo. Colonel 
Wood, thank you very much for speaking with us. yes, ma'am. Lieutenant 
Colonel Pierce Wood of the Center for Defense Information in Washington 
speaking to us from Washington D.C., thank you once again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>