<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981002.2000.0835 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Brazil's 106 million voters will go to the polls on Sunday. They are 
legally required to vote for their next president. The latest public 
opinion survey gives the incumbent, Fernando Enrique Cardoso a 23 
percent lead over his main rival, this despite Brazil's deepening 
financial crisis. In the final report of our week-long series about 
Brazil, THE WORLD's Paula Goby explains the reasons voters are likely 
to stick with their president. To understand President Cardoso's popularity 
in the midst of an economic crisis, you must first know what Brazilians 
have been through in the last few years. Take the case of Francisco 
Araujo, for example. Forty-six-year-old Araujo knows what it's like 
living a life of mere subsistence. From the age of seven, he's worked 
from dawn till dusk as construction worker, but even putting in long 
hours, Araujo says, inflation has eaten up much of his income. Before 
you would go to the supermarket and a kilo of meat would cost 8,000 
poseros. The next week, the price would be 10,000, and then 12,000. 
It was difficult just to get something to eat. People would fight 
over the cheapest meat. But now thing are better. I can even have 
a little barbecue on the weekend. I still don't earn much but it lasts 
a little longer now. Araujo is one of millions of Brazilians who have 
benefited from President Cardoso's stability plan which has slashed 
inflation from 5000 percent in 1994 to an estimated one percent this 
year. During that period of time, many Brazilians have improved their 
standard of living from subsistence level to the status of real consumers. 
For Araujo, this has meant the achievement of a life-long dream. With 
President Cardoso, I was able to achieve something that I fought for 
all my life but had never managed. I built my own house. I had tried 
before, but as soon as I managed to save enough to buy sand, I couldn't 
buy cement. When I had enough to buy the cement, I couldn't afford 
the beams. The stability plan allows me to save now because there's 
no longer inflation. I not only built my house but also furniture 
and things for the family. President Cardoso's popularity ranges from 
the working class to academic circles like this recent gathering in 
honor of his latest book. Taming inflation has turned the 67-year-old 
President Cardoso an absolute favorite for reelection leading the 
polls with 49 percent of the votes. But Cardoso, a former sociology 
professor who taught at Cambridge and Stanford, now faces the worst 
dilemma. International financial instability is triggering a new financial 
crisis in Brazil. In a recent campaign ad, he pledged to defend the 
economy and fight unemployment. In the election of '94, Brazilians 
gave me their vote of confidence. Since then, we've beaten inflation, 
we've made progress. Our standard of living has improved, and the 
country is stable. But these haven't been easy years. We faced difficulties 
and three large world crises, but we didn't change our course. And 
this new international crisis will not make us change our course either. 
The top priority for my next term will be to create jobs. I reaffirm 
my commitment to stability and more jobs. While Cardoso promises to 
create seven million jobs in his next administration, the international 
crisis has hit Brazil hard. Lack of confidence in emerging markets 
has led to a massive capital flight of $30 billion in the last two 
months. To plug the drain, Cardoso hiked interest rates and cut the 
budget. He's also said that tax increases may be necessary. Many economists 
like Laudo Vierra say this will lead to recession and massive layoffs. 
Since this latest crisis hit, Brazil has seen higher interest rates, 
limits on credit, and higher unemployment. Because of the crisis, 
it's impossible to lower interest rates and expand credit to normal 
levels. So unemployment will only grow. That means we're facing the 
dangers of economic recession already by the end of this year or the 
beginning of 1999. Things look so grim that the IMF is negotiating 
a bail out plan for Brazil. And some fear that financial stability 
may eventually lead to social unrest. But for construction worker 
Francisco Araujo, life goes on. The Asian financial crisis and the 
IMF are still distant problems for him as for most Brazilians. President 
Cardoso helped him, so he's giving Cardoso his vote. I think he'll 
fight to improve our lives and get more jobs. I don't know how, but 
I'm sure he won't give up. I am certain of that. With the magic of 
the stability plan fading fast, Cardoso's next administration may 
be one of more sacrifice than glory. Yet the polls confirm that most 
Brazilians trust Cardoso to lead the country through times of crisis, 
just like he led them away from the dark days of inflation. Reporting 
for THE WORLD, this is Paula Goby in Rio de Janeiro. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>