<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981002.2000.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Our top story today is the escalating crisis in Kosovo and the threats 
of NATO action unless Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic loosens his 
stranglehold on the province's ethnic Albanian majority. The possibility 
of military intervention increased this week following accounts of 
massacres of ethnic Albanian men in Kosovo. Serb police denied killing 
civilians, but one survivor says it was the Serbs who beat, kicked, 
and shot him and 12 others last Saturday in one of the massacres. 
President Clinton said today that the United States and its allies 
must remain in his words, "very, very strong." That pronouncement 
could well translate into NATO air strikes. In a moment, we'll hear 
from a retired artillery man who doubts the effectiveness of such 
action. But first we go to the seat of NATO, Brussels, Belgium for 
this report from THE WORLD's Margaret Evans. The gruesome reports 
of the massacres have upped the pressure on NATO to act, challenging 
the alliances pledges not to countenance in Kosovo the kinds of atrocities 
that occurred in Bosnia. NATO leaders like Britain's Tony Blair say 
the organization has to send Milosevic a message in the only language 
he understands: force. There has been of people to face up to the 
fact I think that the only way of stopping this is to give a strong 
message to President Milosevic that is actually backed up. And I think 
what President Milosevic thinks is that he can carry on, as it were, 
engaging in these atrocities and then withdrawing, and each time taking 
the international community to the brink and then drawing back so 
that it saps the will of the international community. Now my judgment 
about this is and has been right from the very beginning that the 
only language he will understand is if the next time he tries this, 
he is immediately hit and punished for it. But Stanley Krosick, head 
of the European Policy Center in Brussels says the NATO members are 
still dawdling well past the time they should have acted. Clearly, 
they're having a tough time because the ethnic cleansing is, seems 
to me, virtually complete. So if they haven't intervened before now, 
their intervention is not going to have the effect that it would have 
had NATO intervened at a much earlier stage. NATO's intelligence reports 
show that Milosevic isn't complying with U.N. demands and that he 
hasn't been for months. But still, some NATO members are waiting for 
a U.N. OK for air strikes, even though some others, including the 
United States, say it's not necessary. It's that kind of hesitation 
that Milosevic has exploited in the past, especially divisions between 
Russia and other members of the U.N. Security Council over the use 
of force. Russia has threatened to all cooperation with NATO should 
the alliance launch air strikes. But Michael Bingyen, diplomatic editor 
of the "Times" newspaper in London, says the international community 
has lost patience with Milosevic saying one thing and doing another, 
that they're now ready for action with or without Russia. I think 
now there is the will because people feel that this sort of pattern 
of behavior means that any threat NATO now issues unless finally backed 
up by some action discredits the whole credibility of NATO itself. 
NATO officials also believe that unless Milosevic perceives the threat 
of force to be real, he'll continue to run circles around the international 
community. Reporting for THE WORLD, I'm Margaret Evans in Brussels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>