<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981002.2000.2327 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thirty years ago, student movements in the United States and around 
the world reached their peaks if not in terms of concrete results, 
then at least in their level of activism. In Chicago, students battled 
police at the Democratic Convention. In Paris, they fought the establishment, 
and in Prague, Czechoslovakia, they faced Soviet tanks. In Mexico 
City, 30 years ago this evening, students gathered in public squares 
to celebrate their newly found unity and call for democratic liberties. 
But by the time the sun set, their demonstrations had turned tragic. 
From the Mexican capital, THE WORLD's Andrea Debrosky tells us the 
story. It was in the evening on October the 2nd. Between 5- and 10,000 
demonstrators filled Platalolco Square near the center of Mexico City. 
And at that moment, one sniper shoot the army. Author Sedro Haguario 
has made a career as a human rights crusader and is now writing a 
book on 1968 in Mexico. At that moment, the soldiers were not prepared 
to start shooting. Reacted shooting at the windows, and after a few 
seconds, a whole battle broke out that lasted for about one hour and 
a half. After that in the dark, there was a shooting in which many 
civilians were assassinated by the snipers, by the police and by the 
army. The next day, the Mexican press reported 20 dead, but accounts 
from foreign reporters placed the number in the hundreds. They were 
in Mexico to cover the Olympic games but many became witnesses on 
that bloody night. The army was circling this plaza called. They were 
holding a peaceful rally, but now the troopers come in and here's 
what it sounds like. In a recent Mexican documentary on 1968, Italian 
journalist Orlena Falaci remembers flare thrown from the military 
helicopters circling above the crowd. Falaci says she told the students, 
"They're going to shoot." They laughed at her. But at that moment, 
the shooting began. Two thousand people were arrested that night and 
taken to a military barracks. Some of the leaders of the student movement 
were among them. They ended up spending 2-1/2 years in prison in Mexico 
City. Raula Radesgare was one of them. He now works for the Leftist 
Party of the Democratic Revolution. The responsibility of Mexico's 
highest political authorities at the time cannot be evaded, including 
that of the president, the interior minister, and the top rank in 
the military. The responsibility of all those people make Platalolco 
unique in the history of Mexico's repression. There's other examples 
of repression but none of them have been like Platalolco. What happened 
in Platalolco Square on October the 2nd, 1968 has never been resolved. 
No one knows who sent the snipers or who gave orders to shoot. Author 
Sedro Haguario again. We had two massacres, the physical, brutal massacres, 
and then the massacres. There was a conspiracy of silence. The conspiracy 
of silence Haguario mentions essentially killed the democratic movement 
of 1968. With many of its leaders in jail and the government unwilling 
to talk, the movement was paralyzed. Years later, Gustario Yesordas, 
who was president in '68, assumed full political responsibility for 
the bloody events. But no Mexican officials were ever charged. And 
as Mexico enters what many are calling a transition to democracy, 
the question for many of the '68 demonstrators is how much Mexico 
has really changed in 30 years. Historian Antonio Gonzales Eleon. 
I don't believe that authoritarianism as a political style in Mexico 
has been weakened. I don't deny the changes we've made but I think 
we're talking about an authoritarian culture, a culture which accepts 
hierarchies and which flirts with democracy is something it sees but 
is unable to produce. But others are more optimistic. Mario Nunes, 
a student leader in '68 is now with the mayor's office in Mexico City. 
He says without '68, today's transition to democracy would have been 
unthinkable. Without any doubt, we'd have to say that those who are 
part of the political movement in '68 are those who have given strength 
to the entire process of social mobilization against the authoritarian 
regime of the Institutional Revolutionary Party. Diacritical tradition 
is what's giving shape to the political transformation we're seeing 
today. For Mexicans, the long journey to democracy is still a work 
in progress. And while many of the leaders of the '68 movement say 
their call for liberta democratica, democratic liberty, has born fruit. 
Few would say it's enough. For THE WORLD, this is Andrea Debrosky 
in Mexico City. Flags are flying at half staff in Mexico City today 
in honor of the Platalolco massacre. And evening march from the city's 
main Zocolo Plaza to the massacre site is expected to draw tens of 
thousands of people. It's clear that the events of 30 years ago continue 
to echo in Mexican life today. To learn how, we turn to Lorenzo Meyer, 
a political analyst at the Callejo de Mexico in Mexico City and a 
visiting professor this year at Stanford University. Professor Meyer, 
if you can tell us, do you think that there is any sign now that Mexicans 
will ever really know exactly what did happen 30 years ago today, 
October 2nd, 1968? I think that we will learn a lot in these days. 
Many people are volunteering their points of views, their information, 
their knowledge, and it seems that an historical period is ending, 
is helping those who want to make an account of what happened in '68 
as a way to ask how come Mexico was able to experience that brutality, 
that political brutality? What can explain that, and how can we avoid 
that in the future? But tell me more about that. I mean, if this code 
of silence seems to be softening at this point, Mexicans can find 
out more about what did happen, but why is it even important 30 years 
later? Because a system that produced the massacre of '68, it is still 
there. Of course, it has changed a lot. It's now very weak. It's perhaps 
in the final stages of its long, protracted life. Platalolco is important 
to speed up that end, to close that chapter, that sad chapter of Mexican 
history. And knowing what happened, and being able to ask for accountability 
is a key element I the transformation of Mexico. What about the matter 
of accountability? Since the system that produced it is still in place, 
do you expect that there would ever be a time when, for instance, 
whoever it was who might have ordered the shots in the first place 
or fired the shots be held culpable? In a symbolic sense, yes, because 
the person that was in charge, he is already dead. This is the President 
Gustapo Dejasortas who was the president at the time who eventually 
did say that he was responsible for what happened but he did not apologize 
for it. Yes, exactly. But if the party that produced that kind of 
politician, the PRI, can be asked again in a symbolic way to account 
for that episode, it will have meaning for Mexicans today and not 
only for historical sense. I think what some Americans might find 
ironic about all of this is that the current president, Ernesto Zedillo, 
was apparently a 16-year-old protester back then. I guess there are 
some pictures of him showing him being roughed up by some of the police 
at the time. He has said that 1968 was the start of his own political 
awareness. The interesting thing is that he is now leading the party 
that perpetuated this assault on students who were in the square. 
Do you expect ever that he could issue some sort of public apology 
on behalf of the government that he now leads? No, no, he's too weak 
a president, and he cannot jeopardize his relationship with the party. 
And that party, PRI, is very much as it was then trying to hide what 
happened and trying not to be blamed for what happened. Now we have 
two opposition parties that are much behind right to open the archives 
and to investigate '68. The president doesn't have the power that 
he used to have in the past. Mexico is becoming a more plural society 
and you sense that the system is about to change. I think that the 
closing chapter is being written right now. Lorenzo Meyer is a political 
scientist and visiting professor this year at Stanford University's 
Center for Latin American Studies speaking to us from Northern California. 
Professor, thank you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>