<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981002.2000.2025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Washington continues to ratchet up the pressure against Slobodan 
Milosevic, a possible scenario is taking shape. U.S. led NATO air 
strikes attempt to force the Serbian leader to withdraw his troops 
from Kosovo, then a U.S.-led ground force moves into the Serbian province 
to try to keep the peace. As that possibility looks more and more 
like a probability, it raises a question: Why is the United States 
responsible for solving a conflict in a place few Americans had heard 
of until this year? THE WORLD's David Lavalle went looking for some 
answers. In President Clinton's mind at least, the country's obligation 
is clear. Late yesterday, he directed the secretaries of state and 
defense to brief the Congress on the current situation in Kosovo. 
And today in a press conference, the president laid out the reasons 
for possible military intervention. We have to be very, very strong 
here. We need to stop the violence, get a negotiated settlement, and 
work our way through this. We don't want thousands upon thousands 
of people to be caught up in a war or to starve or freeze this winter 
because they have been displaced. So we're working on it very hard, 
and I'm quite hopeful that we'll have a positive resolution of it. 
The humanitarian crisis in Kosovo is compelling. Since the conflict 
began in Kosovo, there have been several documented cases of massacres 
of ethnic Albanians. This is genocide in the heart of Europe, and 
there's a moral obligation on the part of the United States to prevent 
genocide from occurring. War crimes expert Paul Williams teaches international 
law at American University. He says the Europeans have failed to get 
their act together and have come to rely on the United States to solve 
the crisis. Therefore, Washington must step forward to prevent any 
further ethnic cleansing. We know the same individual, Milosevic, 
who directed the Yugoslav Army and the paramilitary troops to carry 
out genocide in Croatia and Bosnia is in charge of those troops and 
is directing them to carry out the ethnic cleansing and soon to be 
genocide in Kosovo. And with the use of air power and serious diplomacy, 
we can prevent genocide in Kosovo, and we should therefore do it. 
But questions remain about why Europe has not taken the lead. The 
Serb military offensive in Kosovo has gone on for months and in Europe's 
back yard. So why is the U.S. in the driver's seat? Jane Sharpe, a 
senior research fellow at the Center for Defense Studies in London 
puts it this way: Europe relies on Washington for leadership, and 
that's the result of their long-standing strategic alliance. Kosovo 
is a European problem, she says, but Europe expects the U.S. to take 
the initiative. It's bigger than the question of what to do about 
Kosovo or what to do about Bosnia. It's a question of how you organize 
the post Cold War world. And the assumption is I think in the United 
States as well as in Europe that the U.S. and Western Europe had better 
hang together. But for some critics, hanging together is not a compelling 
enough argument to intervene in a far away conflict, humanitarian 
crisis or not. I'm afraid the United States is drifting into yet another 
conflict in the Balkans. Ted Carpenter of the CATO Institute, a conservative 
think tank in Washington, believes Kosovo is not America's problem. 
He says the U.S. should only use its military might to protect national 
security interests, not to micro manage the Balkans. We have to realize 
that although the United States is the strongest single power in the 
international system, there's still a limit to our ability to address 
problems and dictate outcomes everywhere. And if we stretch ourselves 
so thin dealing with strategically and economically irrelevant entities 
like Kosovo, we are not going to have the ability to address real 
security threats if they should emerge. Meanwhile, America continues 
to debate whether to use force in Kosovo, and the mood in Washington 
is heating up. The State Department is now urging Americans in Yugoslavia 
to consider leaving. For THE WORLD, I'm David Lavalle. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>