<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981002.2000.2999 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
London fashion week has ended. The more than 50 designers who held 
catwalk shows have left, and the 140 others who exhibited shoes, bags, 
and the like have taken their fashionable selves home, too. When we 
sent our reporter, Mary Louise Kelly to the big fashion show, we expected 
her to report back on the latest and greatest in silk, satin, stripes, 
and sequence. Well, Mary Louise found all that and another fashion 
trend, too. On the catwalk in London this week, basic black, fake 
fur, and thigh high minis were out. What was in? Hot pink, floor gracing 
skirts, and victims of flooding in Bangladesh. That's right. The star 
of this week's London fashion week was Bangladeshi designer B.B. Russell. 
For her show, she flew in 18 models from Bangladesh, many of whom 
had never been on a plane before. It's become the talk of London's 
fashion world. And if the clothes sell, Russell will have made a profit 
and a point. I think through culture and creativity, I believe poverty. 
You can do your fashion but you can double up the economy of a country. 
It's what's stopping. And creative people has lot to give in this 
world and about time they start, the designers, to do something like 
this. Russell, a top model in the 1980s for Giorgio Armani and Carl 
Lagerfeld already employs more than 35,000 weavers in Bangladesh. 
The recent floods forced her to sell many of her own possessions to 
buy new looms. But Russell says it will have been worth it if it helps 
Bangladeshis set up small, sustainable businesses. When I see the 
smile of the village people when I get them out of poverty, that's 
my mental satisfaction; it's priceless. But B.B. Russell isn't the 
first or the most daring designer to make a political fashion statement. 
Alice Rawthorn who covers fashion for the "Financial Times" of London 
cites a British designer who caused a stir during the early years 
of the Thatcher administration. Katherine Hemnet, she was then a very 
prominent British designer turned out at an official reception at 
10 Downing Street, the prime minister's residence, wearing a great 
big baggy tee-shirt with a huge type face, an anti-nuclear weapon 
slogan slapped across it. And so designers on and off over the years 
have picked up on ad hoc themes like that, but it certainly does seem 
to have been a lot more political imagery in the content of fashion 
shows and also fashion advertising over the last six months or so. 
Probably the most famous practitioner of mixing fashion and politics 
is Benetton. The Italian company is responsible for some of the most 
controversial advertising images in the world, featuring dying AIDS 
patients, dead Bosnian soldiers, and most recently, mentally handicapped 
children. Benetton's critics accuse the company of exploiting people 
for commercial gain, but Olivia Toscany, Benetton's creative director, 
says his company is doing well by doing good, advertising causes more 
than clothes. I don't think that when people look at an image, they 
run and buy anything. Just look at an image and they think about the 
human condition. We don't ask them to buy clothes. We never show our 
product. We don't tell them that we are the best in the world. Actually, 
we are showing things that some people don't even want to see them. 
And it works. Well, strange, huh? We believe it work, and you know, 
in the 15 year I working for Benetton, the company got ten times bigger. 
So financially, it's doing very well. So now they can't criticize 
so much. Benetton isn't alone. British designer Alexander McQueen, 
the new head of the Paris house, Shevanshe, shocked his audience in 
London this week by using disabled models. American Amy Mullins, who 
lost both her legs when she was a child, strolled down the catwalk 
on a pair of wooden legs. McQueen's point is that disabled women can 
be beautiful, too. Fashion writer, Alice Rawthorn predicts that's 
what's daring now will be normal in another generation. We look back 
20 or 30 years ago, designers were then criticized in absolutely similar 
ways for putting black women on the runway. When Yves St. Laurent 
did it in the early '70s, it was completely radical. And now, of course, 
that seems ridiculous. You've got star black models like Naomi Campbell. 
And, in fact, questions are now asked if you don't have an ethnic 
mix in a catwalk show, runway show, which is really positive 'cause 
it means that people are actually questioning those sort of old squeaky 
clean stereotypes. At the end of the day, though, those squeaky clean 
stereotypes sell. Ultimately, fashion is about selling clothes, as 
London-based designer Wayne Hemingway told his models this week just 
before they went down the catwalk. Most of what we want out of this 
show is photos of you people in newspapers around the world tomorrow 
morning. It's you. And if you don't achieve that now, we're angry 
with you. Now you've got to look - You've got to look fantastic on 
the end of that catwalk. For THE WORLD, I'm Mary Louise Kelly in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>