<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981002.2000.1259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Every Friday, we chat with foreign correspondents based in the nation's 
capital. This week, our guests are two Middle East correspondents, 
Jonathan Broder of the "Jerusalem Report," and Halled Monseur of the 
Middle East News Agency. Thank you both for stopping by our Washington 
studio. First off, it was just a couple of days ago that the Middle 
East and not Kosovo was foreign policy topic number one. Earlier this 
week, President Clinton hosted an impromptu meeting with Israel's 
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
and invited the two men to come back to the White House for a mid-October 
summit. Jonathan Broder, I want to start with you. Considering the 
very different portrayals of this meeting, how are you reporting this 
week's news about the Middle East peace process for your Israeli readers? 
The meeting that took place in Washington I think was not a surprise 
to Israelis. The main sticking point was the amount of territory that 
the Israelis would withdraw from. The Israelis had been only offering 
nine percent of the West Bank in terms of the size of the area they 
were willing to withdraw from. The United States was demanding 13 
percent. And through American ideas, they came up with a solution 
where the Israelis would withdraw from ten percent and then an additional 
three percent of the land would be set aside for a nature preserve, 
which is basically a euphemism which would not allow the Palestinians 
to do any building of settlements of their own in that territory. 
I think many Israelis saw the meeting at the White House as simply 
an expression of presidential involvement and frankly the need of 
President Clinton to show that he is involved in international affairs 
to distract attention from his impeachment problem. And Halled, how 
about you? Were you more optimistic or less in terms of your portrayal 
of the meeting for your Arab leaders? To answer your question, I see 
very little breakthrough that happened during this meeting. They agreed 
to meet again in mid-October here in the White House or in Camp David 
to start like sort of continue talks trying to remove a great many 
blocks. The Palestinians said they will accept the 13 percent withdrawal 
provided that three percent will be actually kept under Israeli civilian 
and security control which is still a sticking issue the Palestinians 
and the Israelis have to hammer out. And a trip to the region by Madeleine 
Albright, the Secretary of State and Dennis Swas next week. And I 
see harder and harder issues coming in the coming few weeks between 
the two parties. I think that's interesting because as you probably 
know, that stands in stark contrast to the way that some media outlets 
reported the story here and certainly in contrast to the way that 
the White House characterized it, saying that there were major strides 
made. Jonathan Broder, did you report the White House spin on the 
summit that the differences between the two leaders had been substantially 
narrowed? Well, I mentioned that the White House tried to put the 
best face on this, but also pointed out that there are very, very 
difficult issues that remain ahead. And first and foremost is an Israeli 
demand that the Palestinians take very concrete steps to dismantle 
and destroy, are the terms they're using, the terror infrastructure 
in the occupied territories. This is going to be very, very hard for 
Arafat to do. And just today, for example, the Israelis closed off 
the West Bank and Gaza Strip from Israel proper after announcing that 
there are signs that Hamas, the Islamic militant group, is planning 
some form of horrific attack against Israel in retaliation for the 
Israeli killing of three Hamas operatives. Now this all comes at a 
time when Madeleine Albright is going to be traveling to the region 
to try to actually work out these details, and it seems to me it's 
a very, very dangerous time, and the Palestinians' ability to control 
Hamas will be tested or could be tested sooner than we think. Since 
you're both from the region, obviously, you're reading domestic news 
here within the United States, I wonder if you pay attention to certain 
nuances that could possibly escape an American observer during meetings 
such as this. Jonathan Broder, how about for your readers in Israel? 
Well, I think that the nuances of this story are not very subtle. 
The enmity and the personal dislike between Arafat and Netanyahu is 
very, very well known and all one has to do is look at them standing 
on either side of the president. What you're basically looking at 
is sort of like two leaders or a couple that's about to get divorced. 
This has all of the trappings of a very, very, very bitter divorce 
and a fight over property and over custody, over things that both 
of them hold dear. And how about you, Halled? We are not really looking 
here at genuine peace between the two people. We are not here looking 
at even a repeat of the very reluctant handshake between Arafat and 
Rabin in '93 on the White House lawn. These are two leaders who cannot 
- whose chemistry is not working, who cannot find a way to reconcile 
personally. But, again, the more important issues are the political 
and economic issues which are not really working out. Halled Monseur 
with the Middle East News Agency and Jonathan Broder with the "Jerusalem 
Report," nice to talk to you both once again and thank you very much. 
Thank you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>