<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981002.1700.0773 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the last of the singing cowboys is gone: Gene Autry. Gene Autry 
died at his home in Southern California. He was 91 years old. A spokeswoman 
announced Autry's death Friday. No cause of death was given. Autry 
first sang on the radio in 1928 and then went on to make to 95 films 
and star in a TV show from 1950 to 1956. He also made hundreds of 
records, including "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer," and his signature 
tune "Back in the Saddle Again." Kevin Mulroy is the chief historian 
at the Gene Autry Western Heritage Museum in California. kevin mulroy, 
chief historian, gene autry western heritage Boy, this has been a 
bad year for cowboys, Tom. First, Roy Rogers and now Gene Autry. It's 
a terrible loss to those of us involved with western heritage and 
culture. But what a magnificent life. And we at the museum are feeling 
a mixture of sadness and, at the same, wanting to celebrate such a 
true American hero. Now, of course, Gene's career spanned a lot of 
things. He was in movies, he was in . Many of us remember him from 
radio and the radio ranch. That's right. Melody Ranch, of course, 
ran for many years. And in fact, interestingly, Gene Autry actually 
enlisted for the U.S. service in World War II on radio. So many of 
us have fond memories of him from that medium. Of course, it was a 
kind of mixed medium, in one sense, wasn't it, because it started 
out as a western and somehow it evolved into a bit of science fiction? 
That's right. You think he probably has a phantom empire. Exactly. 
Ah, 1935, of course, Gene's first starring role in a serial and that 
saw the birth of many of the elements that we would associated with 
the great singing cowboy in the movies, that mixture of action, music, 
the sidekick. Of course, Gene was with Smiley Burnette in that movie 
and lots of just good adventure fun. In that one, of course, Gene 
would go fight the aliens during the afternoon and head home to make 
his radio show, after doing that. And interestingly, that move was 
shot not far from here in Griffith Park in Barnston Can -- Canyon. 
Now, as we look back on the old radio shows, the old movies, you and 
I talked about this before with the passing of Roy Rogers, but how 
big a star was Gene Autry in Britain where you grew up? Oh, my goodness, 
he was huge over there. He had fan clubs going back to the early `30s. 
And I thought of one of his most famous tours was in 1939, right before 
the outbreak of war in Europe where he took Britain by storm. Record 
crowds, in fact, turned out in Dublin to see Gene Autry at that time. 
It's estimated that between 300 and 500,000 people lined the streets 
of Dublin to see the famous cowboy star. It was something akin to 
Elvis or Beetle mania in its day. With the passing, though of Gene 
Autry, do we have anybody, as you look out there now, who be the equal 
of Gene or Roy, anybody comparable? Well, of course, it's a different 
time and a different era. In many ways, people look back to that time 
as the -- in many ways, simpler. There seemed to be more easy answers, 
if we might say that -- easy answers to difficult questions. And a 
lot of the wonderful innocence to the time when Gene Autry was a star. 
We might think about the cowboy code and his relationship with children. 
Certainly, we'd have to look to Clint Eastwood and maybe he might 
make another western. And some of the television westerns these days, 
interesting to see a new star like Chuck Norris doing "Walker, Texas 
Ranger." Perhaps a new type of western hero for the millennium. But 
nobody quite like Gene. Then, really, nobody quite like Gene. They 
really broke the mold with him. Kevin Mulroy at the Gene Autry Museum 
of Western Heritage in California. Gene Autry later built a multimillion 
dollar fortune in broadcasting and was the original owner of the California 
Angels major league baseball team. Throughout his business dealings, 
Gene Autry collected western memorabilia and art. And in 1988, the 
Gene Autry Western Heritage Museum opened in Los Angeles. Gene Autry, 
the singing cowboy, dead at 91. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>