<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981002.1800.1362 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, every year, several thousand people head off from a mountain 
in Georgia for another mountain top in Maine. They hope to hike almost 
3,500 kilometers on the Appalachian trail. A surprising number of 
these through-hikers, as they're called, perhaps as many as one third 
of them, are older Americans. VOA Travel Reporter Ted Landfare met 
one of them in New Hampshire. We had a man finish the trail last year 
and he turned 82 years old on the trail. This is Don Kogswell of Milanockette, 
Maine. His name was Papa, his trail name. They all trail names. And 
I took him up that morning and he looked through the windshield at 
that mountain. I said, well, Papa, there it is. And he leaned in the 
windshield and he says, darn, I can't wait to tackle it. Don Kogswell 
sees a lot of Appalachian trail through-hikers. He runs a hostel where 
they stay at a small cafe where they hang out. And a lot of people 
who stay a night ravenously devour a good meal after six or so hard 
months on the trail are older adults -- people like Hilton Newell. 
Nine years ago, when he was 55 and had just retired as a postmaster, 
Hilton "Buddy" Newell set out from Georgia to hike the Appalachian 
trail. He'd done some hiking a week at a time at most, near his home 
rural New Hampshire. And his family often invited Appalachian trail 
through-hikers home for a hot meal. For them, Buddy's son, Randy, 
who was then in high-school, developed a fascination with the trail. 
Randy was determined to hike it, but fate intervened. He became desperately 
ill. The diagnosis, MS, the debilitating disease multiple sclerosis. 
And it got progressively worse. He did graduate and then, shortly 
after, he was confined to a wheelchair and eventually dead. And so 
I was -- I thought I'd be a, you know, I guess you'd call me a surrogate 
hiker. So I told him if I -- when I retired, if I felt I could do 
it, I would do it for him. So there was Buddy Newell on Springer Mountain 
that day in April 1989 about to challenge the Appalachian trail with 
his daughter Diane and, as soon as she could get off from school, 
his granddaughter Nicole. Our trail name was the 3Gs. That's three 
generations. At times, 2Gs and, eventually, I ended up 1G. For of 
the three of them, only 55-year-old Buddy Newell made it the whole 
way in Maine. And at the end of every single day, he took a little 
mini tape recorder out of his backpack and recorded a message for 
his sick son back home. He told Randy every detail of the day, so 
that Randy could, in his own way, hike the trail with him. And what 
stories Buddy sent home from post offices along the trail. Stories 
of aches and pains, of meager food and new, fast friends, of a copperhead 
snake that slithered up to Buddy's foot while he napped, or the rattlesnake 
that he stepped over, thinking it was a fallen branch, of the odd 
sensation of seeing a passing car, after several days alone in the 
woods, when a scampering squirrel was the fastest thing he'd seen, 
of the crazy things that preoccupy the mind in the woods. Our whole 
group cut off toothbrush handles. We'd get toilet tissue, we'd knock 
the cork. You become so obsessed with that weight that's constantly 
plaguing your bag, that you'll do anything to lessen it. Buddy Newell, 
who's back working at a post office inside a resort hotel in New Hampshire, 
lost close to 23 kilos that summer of 1989 on the Appalachian trail. 
I've never been a quitter. But I think I found out I would have quit 
there, had it not been for other reasons. Had there been a bus stop 
near me at several -- several points I was at -- you know, you're 
wet for seven, eight days in a row. The only dry clothes you have 
is the set you sleep in. And you get up in the morning and have to 
put the wet clothes back on again, which is very unpleasant. You get 
a week of that and it's enough to make anyone wonder why I -- why 
am I doing this? He did know why, of course. He was doing it for Randy, 
who would die of multiple sclerosis a few years later. Right now, 
this year, other people much older than Buddy Newell are completing 
their six- or seven-month hikes of the Appalachian trail. One who's 
back on the trail is 79-year-old Earl Schaffer. Fifty years ago, at 
age 29, he was the very first person to walk the entire trail. Could 
Buddy Newell, at 64, do it again? Physically, yes, he says, but psychologically, 
he's not so sure. I'm Ted Landfare. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>