<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981002.1700.1382 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1991, a California attorney named Jacqueline Gorman was temporarily 
blinded by optic neuritis, a swelling of the optic nerve that blocks 
signals to the brain. Unable to see the world around her, she retreated 
into memories of her childhood and memories of her disabled brother. 
She tells his story and her own in a memoir called "The Seeing Glass." 
Nancy Beardsley has more. Jacqueline Gorman's blindness began as a 
series of severe headaches. At first, she thought she was just suffering 
from stress caused by her young daughter's recent lung and sinus surgery. 
But the morning after her daughter came home from the hospital, Jacqueline 
Gorman woke up feeling a sticky wetness in her right eye. I went to 
an emergency room clinic thinking maybe I'd scratched the cornea or 
something like that, but I didn't realize that my eye was bleeding 
because an interesting thing about an optic nerve problem is that 
one of the first colors you lose in the spectrum is the color red. 
So I actually ran red lights and when they shifted my eye in the emergency 
room clinic, they realized there was no vision in my right eye. And 
10 days later, the same thing happened to my left eye. That began 
a journey into blindness and isolation that Jacqueline Gorman chronicles 
in detail in "The Seeing Glass." While she'd been struck by an unusually 
severe case of optic neuritis, her doctor believed she'd eventually 
see again. But there were no guarantees as to when that would happen. 
As the granddaughter of a renowned ophthalmologist and a former hospital 
attorney herself, Jacqueline Gorman was no stranger to doctors and 
illness. Still her first response was to panic. I was told by one 
of the doctors the night before that I had maybe a few hours of sight 
left and my reaction to that was to try to memorize the pictures of 
my life. I mean, I pulled out all the photo albums in my house and 
I kept staring at my husband and my daughter, trying to memorize their 
faces. And I didn't want to go to sleep because I didn't want to wake 
up and not being able to see anything which, indeed, was what happened. 
I woke up and I literally fell out of bed. And my first memory of 
this is crawling, you know, on the ground, trying to get my bearings. 
With the real world now a gray blur, Jacqueline Gorman spent as much 
time as she could sleeping, taking refuge in a dream world of sharp 
images and bright colors. But as time wore on, she found her waking 
thoughts turning more and more to her brother Robin, who died after 
being struck by a car as a young man. In the late 1940s, he'd been 
among the first children at Johns Hopkins University to be diagnosed 
with autism which affects a child's ability to interact with the outside 
world. It was a subject so painful her family seldom talked about 
it. But now she began to realize how frightened and alone he, too, 
must have felt. They were very few options available and he became 
a very difficult and it resulted in his needing to be put in an institution. 
Then when I looked back and looked at his later life, I realized what 
a role model he'd been because he managed to make a life for himself 
when he left the institution. He had a job. He had lost a friend. 
And that really gave me a great deal of hope for what I was dealing 
with. Her husband and daughter also helped Jacqueline Gorman cope 
by stubbornly refusing to let her retreat from the world. They made 
a point of wearing blue, which doctors said would be the first color 
she'd see again, even the family dogs have blue bandannas. After three 
months their efforts were rewarded. I came upstairs one morning and 
I knocked something off of the counter and my husband Kenney came 
running over to pick up the pieces so I wouldn't step on them and 
he was wearing a blue bathrobe and I saw this blue come towards me 
and that's when I knew that things were finally going to get better 
and then I started to see green and, of course, the last color to 
come back was red. That took almost a year. Jacqueline Gorman suffered 
another less severe bout of optic neuritis four years later, after 
her second child was born and she's been told there's an 80 to 90 
percent chance it will strike again. But she now feels better equipped 
to deal with being blind and she continues to benefit from her brother's 
example. My brother loved to hold up colored pieces of glass and plastic 
in front of his eyes and look through the world through different 
colors. And when I was looking through his things, there was this 
yellow piece of glass that I remembered from his childhood that he 
still carried around with him. And when I held it front of my eyes, 
I found out that I could see much better. The one aspect of her vision 
Jacqueline Gorman hadn't regained was her brightness sense. With her 
brother's glass, even that was restored. Jacqueline Gorman now manages 
a foundation that funds support groups for victims of debilitating 
illnesses. She's also working on a novel. I'm Nancy Beardsley. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>