<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981002.1800.2185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meanwhile, massacres in Kosovo have led the international community 
to issue stern warnings to Serb leaders, but what can the use of force 
accomplish? In London, VOA's Laurie Kassman looks at the advantages 
and disadvantages of military action as diplomatic tool in Yugoslavia. 
The international community is warning Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic that time is running out. British Foreign Secretary Robin 
Cook does not mince words. Have a sought -- and honorably for a diplomatic 
solution. We don't want to use force. But today I warn President Milosevic 
that if it will take force, Britain is ready to back force. Mr. Milosevic 
has heard the threats before. Still, strategic affairs writer Paul 
Beaver of Jane's Defense Weekly, says the reports of massacres in 
Kosovo have enraged the allies. And he points to NATO's air strikes 
in Bosnia three years ago that helped curb Serb aggression there. 
What air strikes are actually -- and so productive to stop it, I don't 
know. The one thing we learned from Bosnia was that the Serbs do respect 
the use of force. They do respect any tough action, so maybe it will. 
NATO says it's ready. The U.N. Milosevic is complying with U.N. demands 
to pull his troops out of Kosovo. Britain is pushing for a NATO strike, 
even without U.N. Security Council support. So far, Security Council 
Member Russia is reluctant to approve the action. Mr. Beaver says 
Russia is in a difficult position. The Russians, of course, are very 
mindful of their own situation in Chechnya which is very parallel 
to the situation in Kosovo. As the prospects of a military attack 
increase, analysts look at the option. Military analyst Ken Petrie 
of the Institute for Strategic Studies in London says the logical 
choice would be Tomahawk missile strikes against Serb bases in Kosovo. 
Got two escalating air campaign. First, they would go for military 
targets, such as commander control headquarters, such as barracks, 
such as surface-to-air missiles and the air defense capability that 
they have in Kosovo. If the initial attacks don't work, then the whole 
thing will be ratcheted up. Mr. Petrie says air strikes also cut down 
on potential civilian casualties. But will it achieve its goal? Paul 
Beaver of Jane's Defense Weekly says that depends on the political 
objectives. Well, it depends on what the aim is at the end of the 
day. If we want to stop the Serbs from brutalizing the Ethnic Albanians 
in Kosovo, then -- then maybe. Now, if we want to have a long-term 
solution, then we need to look at the whole and not just Kosovo. Mr. 
Beaver warns that air strikes will not solve all the problems in Kosovo 
or the Balkans, in general. Serb officials now warn they will consider 
a NATO attack as an act of war. Analysts fear an allied strike without 
clear political objectives could backfire and fuel even more Serb 
aggressions in Kosovo. Laurie Kassman VOA NEWS, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>