<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981002.1800.0772 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. Congress made public thousands of additional documents Friday 
stemming from Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr's investigation of 
President Clinton and Monica Lewinsky. Our national correspondent 
Jim Malone has been looking through the documents and has a report. 
The thick, three-volume set contains nearly 5,000 pages of documents 
and other materials from the Starr investigation. The material does 
not contain any startling revelations about the White House sex and 
perjury scandal, but it does provide plenty of additional context 
and details which will be seized upon by both supporters and detractors 
of the president. In addition to the full grand jury transcripts from 
key witnesses like Clinton confidant Vernon Jordan and the president's 
personal secretary Betty Curry, the volumes also contain transcripts 
of the telephone conversations Linda Tripp recorded with her one-time 
friend Monica Lewinsky. It was those recorded phone conversations 
which Miss Tripp presented to Independent Counsel Starr, which prompted 
the perjury and cover-up probe of the of the Clinton -- White House. 
At times, Linda Tripp comes across as manipulative as she tries to 
draw Monica Lewinsky into detailing her sexual relationship with the 
president and White House efforts to find her a job. At other times, 
Miss Tripp comes across more as a sympathetic friend, offended by 
Miss Lewinsky's treatment at the hands of White House aides. During 
one conversation, Linda Tripp tells Monica Lewinsky that she doesn't 
want to lie, if she's asked about Miss Lewinsky's relationship with 
the president. Monica Lewinsky responds that she would do anything, 
even giving Linda Tripp money, to keep her quiet about the affair. 
Miss Lewinsky then says, about the president, even though he despises 
me right now, I know in my inner mind, I love him. The new materials 
also provide new details about White House efforts to find Monica 
Lewinsky a job. The president''s lawyers have strenuously denied the 
allegation for Mr. Starr that the president sought to arrange a job 
for Miss Lewinsky to keep her quiet about their affair. In his grand 
jury testimony, long-time Clinton friend Vernon Jordan recalled how 
the president told him that he was aware that several people were 
trying to help Monica Lewinsky find a job, including White House aide 
John Podesta and United Nations Ambassador Bill Richardson. Mr. Jordan 
says he was initially asked to help Miss Lewsinky by the president's 
personal secretary Betty Curry. When prosecutors pressed Mr. Jordan 
if Miss Curry had ever made a similar request for anyone else, Mr. 
Jordan said he didn't think so. The House Judiciary Committee redacted 
or blacked out some of the materials which dealt with personal information 
or which contained curse words. Presidential Spokesman Joe Lockhart 
complained that the release of the additional Starr material was another 
example of how republicans have turned the investigation of the president 
into a partisan process. Lawmakers from both parties said they expected 
the additional material would not have a major impact, as Congress 
prepares for an upcoming vote on whether to proceed with an impeachment 
inquiry against the president. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>