<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981002.1700.3226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The American Council on Education has released its annual status report 
on minorities in higher education. As VOA's Challis McDonough tells 
us, this year, the ACE focused on college admissions and diversity. 
Deborah Wiles is the co- author of this year's study and she says 
minorities have made progress, but are still underrepresented on college 
campuses. She says the last decade has seen a 61 percent increase 
in minority college enrollment, but minorities still have a long way 
to go before they catch up with whites. Even though we are seeing 
more African Americans and Latinos going on to college, we still find 
that 25- to 29-year-old whites are about twice as likely to complete 
four more years of college than African Americans and nearly three 
times more likely than Hispanics in this age group to complete at 
least four years of college. Miss Wiles says Asians and Hispanics 
have made the largest increases. But she says the data in this year's 
report comes from 1996, before the large states of California and 
Texas did away with their affirmative action admissions policies. 
So next year's report might show some minorities losing ground. Critics 
of affirmative action say it amounts to setting quotas for certain 
minorities, penalizing better-qualified white students who might otherwise 
be admitted to the schools. Thomas Wood is the co-author of California's 
Proposition 209, the constitutional amendment that changed the way 
that state admits students to its university system. He says the initiative 
was not designed to keep minorities out of California's elite schools. 
He says it simply removes race as a consideration in admissions decisions 
so students are accepted only on their academic records. Mr. Wood 
says he wants emphasis to be more diverse, too, but he think the answer 
is to improve the education system from the bottom up. He says the 
goal should be to raise minority test scores, not lower admission 
standards. THOMAS WOOD, CO-AUTHOR, PROPOSITION 209: The country needs 
to put more energy into making sure that there is quality education 
that's provided to all students, you know, white, black, Asian American. 
That's where the ultimate problems lies. Mr. Wood also says minorities 
have been closing the gap in test scores. So the problem is slowly 
fixing itself. The ACE officials say some of the criticism of affirmative 
action arises from school's reliance on standardized tests when making 
admissions decisions. African American and Hispanic students tend 
not to do as well as whites on those tests. So the critics say the 
schools lower their standards to admit more minorities. William Sudlersec 
is a professor of education and the director of testing at the University 
of Maryland. He wrote a special section of the ACE report on alternative 
procedures that can allow schools to look at other criteria when making 
those decisions. Mr. Sudlersec says the tests were originally designed 
to predict the academic success of middle- class white men. And he 
says they still do that very well. But he says other factors are much 
better for making the same predictions about women and ethnic minorities. 
Basically, it gets at things that have to do with your creativity, 
how well you're able to look at things from different points of view 
and also how well you work the system. Mr. Sudlersec says a number 
of universities, including his own, are now looking at so-called non-cognitive 
variables, in addition to test scores and grades when making admissions 
decisions. Affirmative action critic Thomas Wood does not think these 
procedures will work as well as the ACE status report asserts. It's 
only going to be helpful in increasing the number of minority students 
if minority students score better on these non-cognitive variables. 
That's a very implausible assumption. I mean, it's assuming that black 
and Asian American students are going to fall down on other kinds 
of measures that are non-cognitive, like leadership quality, musical 
ability and all the other things that you're going to look at. Mr. 
Wood thinks most universities will not adopt the alternative procedures. 
The Education Council says a number of schools already use non-cognitive 
variables, including at least one University of California campus. 
Challis McDonough, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>