<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981002.1800.0507 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration said Friday the U.S. is ruling out a resumption 
of American aid to Cambodia until the ruling party forms a coalition 
government with its rivals. Testifying on Capitol Hill, Assistant 
Secretary of State's a real place in the government. Mr. Roth dismissed 
Hun Sen's post-election, power-sharing offer which would have allowed 
his party to control all major ministries. U.S. Aide was cut off to 
Cambodia, following a military coupe last year. One of Cambodia's 
main opposition leaders is former Finance Minister Sam Ransi. In an 
interview with VOA Friday, Mr. Ransi said a power-sharing role in 
a new Cambodian government is not the main goal of the country's opposition 
parties. As he told VOA's David Dyer, the opposition's primary demand 
is for a complete make-over of Hun Sen's government. The Cambodian 
politician was responding to remarks made Friday by U.S. State Department 
official Stanley Roth. Mr. Roth says negotiations for a new Cambodian 
government, following July's national elections, should result in 
a meaningful role for the opposition. But Sam Ransi says the opposition 
is demanding a much broader goal. We think that the system represented 
by Hun Sen is leading Cambodia towards disaster, deforestation, drug 
trafficking, extra- judicial executions, human beings trafficking, 
money laundering, the collapse of the rule of law. All these system 
is not viable. It is why the opposition is not interested in taking 
part in any coalition government intended just to preserve this system. 
We want to reform and to change the system dramatically. Mr. Sam Ransi 
met with U.S. officials Friday as part of a tour of several countries 
to discuss the situation in Cambodia. Talks were said to resume with 
the opposition Monday in Panam Penn on forming a new government. King 
Sianuk is reported to be flying to Panam Penn the same day the talks 
are to resume. But Mr. Sam Ransi says this is not a sign of progress 
but, rather, he says, it indicates Hun Sen is putting pressure on 
King Sianuk not to leave Cambodia for his regular medical treatment 
in China. The King has been staying at his resident outside Panam 
Penn near the ancient royal capital of Ankor Watt. The opposition 
leader said King Sianuk is upset over allegations the king may have 
had a part in an alleged assassination attempt against Hun Sen. Sam 
Ransi says the attack was a fabricated incident intended to allow 
the government to crack down on the opposition. Mr. Sam Ransi says 
he is appealing to the international community during his overseas 
trip to oppose human rights abuses in Cambodia. Friday, the U.S. House 
International Relations Committee passed a resolution calling for 
the U.S. government to begin collecting evidence against Hun Sen for 
presentation to an international tribunal on human rights. David Dyer, 
VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>