<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981002.1800.3173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pianist and composer George Winston is recognized world-wide as the 
pioneer of the new-age music movement. His Wyndham Hill record label 
set the tone for this popular American genre. As the Grammy Award 
winner looks back on his 25-year career, he's compiled a new CD called 
"All the Seasons of George Winston." In addition to his well-known 
works, the collection includes four previously unreleased songs. VOA's 
Doug Levine profiles this man for all seasons. George Winston likes 
to be known as an instrumental folk musician. But his melodic and 
reflective solo piano albums on Wyndham Hill records go far beyond 
folk and new age. There's also jazz, blues, pop and rock. Listen the 
classical influence in "Variations on a Cannon," by Paco Bell. George 
Winston explains that writing music is an intensely personal process. 
I'm usually practicing something else and then I'll drift off into 
a fragment and, well, that feels like a real tune and I'll make a 
note of it, you know, sing in E-minor or something and then write 
down the chords and then, you know, over a year just, you know, then 
make up a tune once a year, maybe. And I don't have a composer's mentality 
at all. I just -- by just accidentally compose a tune now and then. 
"All the Seasons of George Winston" is the follow-up to his tribute 
album to the late jazz pianist, Vince Giraldi. Winston says he was 
one of Giraldi's biggest fans. Well, I do more songs of Vince Giraldi's 
than any other single composer. And I love his concept of melody. 
I love it -- the way he uses chord. And also, he composed for the 
piano. George Winston was born in 1949 in Michigan and grew up in 
Florida, Mississippi and Montana. He began piano lessons at age eight, 
which led to playing organ in a rock and roll band as a teenager. 
One of his earliest influences came from a legendary American piano 
player. I would say my first main piano influence to play the piano 
was Fats Wahler. And I was talking to Teddy Wilson one time and he 
-- and he was Teddy's first piano influence, too. And I went, that's 
not -- not that I would ever want to compare myself to Teddy Wilson, 
but we did have the same guy that kicked us on, you know. Overall, 
now my main pianistic influences are the great New Orleans R&B pianists,, 
Henry Butler, Dr. John and, more than anyone on the piano overall 
for inspiration, an influence has been the late James Booker. It was 
Booker's blues influence that inspired George Winston's first album 
"Ballads and Blues." With his most recent collection, "All the Seasons 
of George Winston," listeners can hear excerpts from his concept album's 
"Autumn," "December," "Winter into Spring," and "Summer." In 1996, 
he won the Grammy Award for best new age album, "Forest." Winston 
has produced and recorded traditional Hawaiian finger-style or slat-key 
guitarists for his Dancing Cat label. Hear the tune from his latest 
CD called "Humming Bird." I'm Doug Levine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>