<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981002.1700.2179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the war in Bosnia Harescavina, the NATO decision on whether 
or not to launch a military strike was seen as a test case for the 
alliance. The strikes eventually came and were widely considered key 
to bringing Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to to the debate 
and negotiating table. Today NATO faces the same challenge in Serbia's 
Kosovo province. Will NATO strike again? That's the question examined 
in today's edition of Dateline. Here's Pamela Taylor. During the three-month 
Yugoslav offensive to cripple the separatist Kosovo Liberation Army 
or KLA, NATO has hesitated to intervene. The stakes are higher than 
in Bosnia, which is an independent state asked for outside intervention. 
Kosovo, however, is a province of Serbia inside the Federal Republic 
of Yugoslavia. U.S. officials say NATO has the authority to strike 
against forces which are attacking civilians. And recent reports of 
atrocities and massacres have prompted renewed calls for NATO action. 
Reports say more than 30 Ethnic Albanians, many women and children, 
were killed and some mutilated in a recent Serb attack. On Wednesday, 
the United States called for the U.N. Security Council to authorize 
further action in Kosovo. The State Department said military action 
is now a real possibility if the Yugoslav government does not pull 
its forces out of the province. VOA Correspondent Gill Butler reports. 
With winter approaching, many are without shelter. And officials say 
a humanitarian disaster in the heart of Europe is a real possibility. 
NATO planning for some sort of military response to the Serb refusal 
to halt the offensive is reported to be complete and only a political 
decision remains. According to State Department spokesman James Foley, 
U.N. Secretary General Kofi Anan is to report to the Security Council 
next week or Mr. Milosevic's compliance or non-compliance with the 
resolution demanding a cease fire. Mr. Foley says, so far, there's 
no evidence that Serb force have been reduced in Kosovo. I think you've 
seen reports, including on television, that some units have been withdrawn. 
But our information is that, well, that may be true. At the same time, 
other units are rotating into Kosovo. We certainly have no evidence 
of inept drawdown of forces. And equally to the point, we continue 
to have reports of fighting. Both small arms fire and artillery fire 
were reported on the ground again today in the Suva Reca province 
of Southern Kosovo. Mr. Foley refused to give a timetable of when 
NATO might use force. But in his words, the clock is ticking and that 
there is no grace period for Mr. Milosevic. VOA State Department Correspondent 
Gill Butler. Senate Democratic Leader Tom Daschle says there's widespread 
support in the U.S. Congress for a NATO strike. I don't think it's 
too late to take action at all. In fact, I think action is warranted. 
I believe that there is strong support in the country and in the Congress 
for taking action. I know that the president wanted to consult with 
an array of our allies, the United Nations. I believe that's being 
done and, when it's done, I believe we'll act. Senate Democratic Leader 
Tom Daschle. The former Republican leader in the Senate, Robert Dole, 
says he believes those sentiments are shared by most Republicans. 
Mr. Dole briefed President Clinton on his recent visit to Kosovo earlier 
this month. He told the president that the issue for America is leadership 
and living up to promises made by two U.S. presidents. I told President 
Clinton, if you -- if the NATO makes this decision, when you announce 
it, I'll stand by your side. I mean, this is not a "Wag the Dog." 
This is a promise you made, a promise President Bush made. It's bipartisan 
and I'll stand by your side. This is a -- this is about leadership 
and the character of America. Asked if he believed the media reports 
about Serb atrocities, Mr. Dole responded by describing some of the 
scenes he witnesses in Kosovo. We went through 20 checkpoints in a 
six-hour drive in these Serb villages. And the villages, some of them 
that hadn't been touched when we were there, have now been destroyed. 
They burned the village. They burned the Albanian homes. They don't 
touch the Serb homes. And then they drive the people up into the mountains 
and then Milosevic has the gall to tell me and Assistant Secretary 
Shaddick that he's doing all he can to help these people. Mr. Dole 
said he believes that this time the NATO threat is real because of 
the widespread agreement among the allies that President Milosevic 
has gone too far in trying to destroy the KLA separatists. I hope 
it's not the normal hand-wringing we had at the United Nations and 
that the different foreign leaders. But I'll tell you, what's happening 
to the Kosovars, the Albanians there, it shouldn't happy to any human 
being. And it's been going on or three months and they were always 
going to do something. Well, if it does -- if you don't stop this, 
we're going to do something. and I think Milosevic is sort of laughing 
at us. Whether Serbian President Milosevic is laughing or not, as 
Mr. Doles suggests, his foreign minister told reporters in Washington 
that there is no justification for military action against his government. 
Zhividan Yovanovich, who is on an official visit to the United Sates, 
spoke to reporters at the National Press Club. And we hear more in 
this report from VOA Correspondent Douglas Roberts. Threat or use 
of force has no grounds, cannot bring about dialogue, can only help 
open up some dialogue, encourage terrorism in wider area and provoke 
further destabilization in the area. Mr. Yvanovich was not given the 
opportunity to put his case directly to the Clinton administration. 
He held talks with several congressmen, but not with officials of 
the State Department or the National Security Council. But Foreign 
Minister Yovanovich said he does not believe the alliance will act. 
We expect reason and wisdom. We don't expect any kind of strikes. 
Calls for military action against Belgrade were heightened by two 
widely reported massacres in Kosovo last weekend. More than 30 Ethnic 
Albanians, civilians, including women, children and elderly people, 
were shot or stabbed to death, some of them mutilated in villages 
near the provincial capital. Eye witnesses have blamed Serbian forces 
for the atrocities, but Mr. Yovanovich rejected the charges. The government 
strongly denies any involvement of its security forces in any such 
incident or occurrence. He said Yugoslav authorities are continuing 
to investigate the killings and he said Belgrade has invited foreign 
specialists to join the probe. VOA Correspondent Douglas Roberts. 
Fred Abraham's, a researcher with Human Rights Watch, was one of the 
first outsiders to visit the site in the forest of Drenitza where 
the Kosovar-Albanians were allegedly massacred. When he arrived, he 
says villagers were carrying bodies out of the forest to be buried. 
But he saw seven still laying on the spot where they'd been killed. 
There was a makeshift tent where they had been because the village 
of Obrinya had been under shellings for the past few days, so there 
were clear signs of a -- their cooking site and where they had been 
sleeping. The mattresses under the tents were soaked in blood. And 
in a gully, approximately five or six meters away, there was still 
seven bodies, five women and two children. All of them had been shot 
in the head. All evidence suggests very strongly that this was done 
by military forces against unarmed civilians. Fred Abraham says the 
bodies also showed evidence of mutilation and that one man had his 
throat cut, another had knife wounds in his belly. He said, although 
there have been other reported incidents of civilian massacres in 
Kosovo, this is the first where documentation was immediate. Will 
NATO strike in Kosovo? That was the question examined on this edition 
of "Dateline." I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>