<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981003.0505 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Those who could vote Saturday on whether to ease Latvian citizenship 
laws for hundreds of thousands of stateless ethnic Russians were often 
confused, and those who couldn't were stony with resentment. A referendum 
held in conjunction with voting for the 100-seat Saeima parliament 
asked voters if they want to reject liberalizing citizenship law amendments 
that the parliament passed in June. The amendments were passed after 
a tense spring in which Russia threatened trade sanctions against 
its neighbor and rained a hot barrage of denunciations upon it, including 
Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov's accusation that Latvia was committing 
genocide. The West too was unhappy with Latvia, though its statements 
were more measured. The Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe urged changes and many officials predicted that the European 
Union, which Latvia ardently wants to join, would never let the country 
in unless it lowered the obstacles to citizenship. After the amendments 
were passed, a drive to overturn them began, spearheaded by nationalist 
politicians who claim Latvian national identity is imperiled. After 
Latvia became independent of the Soviet Union in 1991, citizenship 
was granted to ethnic Latvians and to anyone who had lived there prior 
to the Soviet annexation in 1940. That left out the hundreds of thousands 
of ethnic Russians who poured into Latvia during Soviet rule, and 
to their children, even if born in Latvia. Today about 452,000 of 
the country's 740,000 ethnic Russians are without citizenship. Because 
they can't vote, they regarded Saturday's referendum with angry resignation. 
``I was born in Riga, I live in Riga, but I am Russian and can't vote. 
I don't like it here,'' said a young woman who gave her name only 
as Alex, selling cassettes in the vast market that sprawls in and 
around five old dirigible hangars on the outskirts of downtown. Many 
people who could vote were annoyed because the referendum question 
was phrased confusingly: a ``yes'' vote meaning ``no'' to the changes. 
``Frankly, I didn't understand the issue or the ballot,'' said 79-year-old 
Dzetins Alois, who voted in the parliamentary election but not in 
the referendum. He wasn't alone. The Central Elections Commission 
said that as of 4 p.m. (1300 GMT), about 55 percent of the 1.3 million 
people eligible to vote had cast ballots in the election, while about 
52 percent had in the referendum. Some voting irregularities were 
reported, including President Guntis Ulmanis giving a television interview 
inside a polling station, and a polling place in the city of Jurmala 
failing to stamp about 200 ballots properly. The referendum apparently 
slowed voting procedures and elections commission head Arnis Cimdars 
said he was concerned the pace might be too slow to have voting completed 
on time. Of the 21 parties and alliances seeking seats in the Saeima 
(pronounced SIGH-mah), the right-wing Fatherland and Freedom party 
of Prime Minister Guntars Krasts was the only major party campaigning 
to turn down the changes. But even that party's support on the issue 
was not universal. Harijs Vasilievs said he voted for the Fatherland 
and Freedom party because he liked their economic polices, though 
he voted against the referendum ``I think Russian children born in 
Latvia should be given citizenship,'' the 61-year-old Vasilievs said. 
``They are not to blame for the situation they have found themselves 
in.'' On issues other than citizenship, like the need to seek EU and 
NATO membership, there is wide agreement among the parties. There 
is also broad support for the free-market reforms that have raised 
Latvia from the stagnant Soviet era. Voter support for one party or 
another appeared to depend as much on the personality of leaders as 
on specific issues. The party that has been No. 1 in most pre-election 
polls with around 20 percent support is the center-right Peoples Party, 
a new party founded by wealthy businessman and former prime minister 
Andris Skele. Skele has said Latvia relies too much on transit trade 
to and from Russia, and said policies should also focus on producing 
goods in Latvia for export. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>