<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981003.0662 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Latvans were narrowly approving their parliament's controversial moves 
to make citizenship easier for the country's hundreds of thousands 
of stateless Russians, early results from a referendum showed. With 
votes counteed from about 16 percent of the country's precincts, the 
changes were being approved by a 53-46 margin. The remainder apparently 
were blank or spoiled ballots. If the acceptance is borne out in the 
final results, Latvia will have headed off an unpleasant confrontation 
with the West. But whether the results would mollify Russia, which 
has rained denunciations on Latvia for its treatment of ethnic Russians, 
is in doubt. Although the law changes remove years of waiting for 
citizenship applicants, the laws still require adults to have competence 
in Latvia, which many who grew up in all-Russian communities within 
Latvia regard as unreasonable. The referendum held in conjunction 
with voting for the country's 100-seat Saeima parliament asked voters 
if they want to reject liberalizing citizenship law amendments that 
the parliament passed in June. The amendments were passed after a 
tense spring in which Russia threatened trade sanctions against its 
diminutive neighbor and unleashed outraged statements including Moscow 
mayor Yuri Luzhkov's characterizing Latvia as committing genocide. 
Latvia was also under pressure from the West to change the laws. The 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe said the laws 
violated its principles and many officials predicted that the European 
Union, which Latvia ardently wants to join, would never let the country 
in unless it lowered the obstacles to citizenship. But after the amendments 
were passed, a referendum drive to overturn them began, spearheaded 
by nationalist politicians who claim Latvian national identity is 
imperiled. After Latvia became independent of the Soviet Union in 
1991, citizenship was granted to ethnic Latvians and to anyone who 
had lived there prior to the Soviet annexation in 1940. That left 
out the hundreds of thousands of ethnic Russians who poured into Latvia 
during Soviet rule, and to their children even if born in Latvia. 
Today, about 452,000 of the country's 740,000 ethnic Russians are 
without citizenship. Because they can't vote, they regarded Saturday's 
referendum with angry resignation. ``I was born in Riga, I live in 
Riga, but I am Russian and can't vote. I don't like it here,'' said 
a young woman who gave her name only as Alex, selling cassettes in 
the vast market that sprawls in and around five old dirigible hangars 
on the outskirts of downtown. But many people who could vote were 
annoyed because the referendum question was phrased confusingly: a 
``yes'' vote meaning ``no'' to the changes. ``Frankly, I didn't understand 
the issue or the ballot,'' said 79-year-old Dzetins Alois, who voted 
in the parliamentary election but not in the referendum. Some voting 
irregularities were reported, including President Guntis Ulmanis giving 
a television interview inside a polling station, and a polling place 
in the city of Jurmala failing to stamp about 200 ballots properly. 
Of the 21 parties and alliances seeking seats in the Saeima (pronounced 
SIGH-mah), the right-wing Fatherland and Freedom party of Prime Minister 
Guntars Krasts was the only major party campaigning to turn down the 
changes. On issues other than citizenship, like the need to seek EU 
and NATO membership, there is wide agreement among the parties. There 
is also broad support for the free-market reforms that have raised 
Latvia up from the stagnant Soviet era. Voter support for one party 
or another appeared to depend as much on the personality of leaders 
as on specific issues. In the early results, the new center-right 
Peoples Party was at the top with 26 percent. Party leader Andris 
Skele has said Latvia relies too much on transit trade to and from 
Russia, and said policies should also focus on producing goods in 
Latvia for export. The conservative Latvia's Way had 23 percent, followed 
by the Union of Social Democrats, Fatherland and Freedom and the New 
Party. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>