<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981003.0308 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister John Howard's conservative government won re-election 
Saturday and claimed a mandate to reform the nation's tax system despite 
a diminished grip on Parliament. With more than two-thirds of the 
vote counted, computer analysis by the Australian Broadcasting Corp. 
showed the main opposition Labor Party had won a big haul of votes 
away from the government, but not enough to deliver them a majority 
in Parliament's House of Representatives. ``It is clear that the coalition 
will have a working majority in the new Parliament,'' Howard said 
in a victory speech in Sydney. ``I want first and foremost to thank 
the Australian people for returning the government.'' The conservatives 
held off a strong challenge from the far right-wing One Nation party, 
which attracted about 8 percent of the national vote. One Nation leader 
Pauline Hanson, who exploded onto the political scene about 18 months 
ago with proposals to freeze Asian immigration and cut welfare programs 
for Aborigines, appeared not to have been re-elected, calling into 
question the party's ability to continue. About 12 million registered 
voters cast their ballots at thousands of polling booths in public 
buildings, from the nation's desert Outback to its tropical north 
and in its modern, bustling cities in the southeast. Howard could 
take only limited comfort from the victory, with voters deserting 
his governing coalition in droves to opposition parties which may 
yet have the power to alter his tax plan. In the outgoing parliament, 
Howard's governing conservatives held 90 seats, Labor 49 and independents 
eight. A final official outcome in all electorates may not be known 
for days, but the ABC computer was predicting a conservative victory 
by eight seats _ down from the 41-seat majority it held going into 
the election. Labor leader Kim Beazley appeared before cheering supporters 
in Perth to say, ``I think a win by us is unlikely.'' But he was in 
a jovial mood over the gains Labor made in Parliament, despite falling 
short of gaining government. The jubilation of the crowd made it sound 
more like a victory party than a concession speech. Michael Parkin, 
a 30-year-old employee of Telstra Corp., said he voted Labor as a 
protest against Howard's sell-off of one-third of the partly government-owned 
telecommunications giant. ``I voted Labor because of my job. Howard 
has just about sold everything out from under me,'' Parkin said. Howard 
staked his government's fate on what he calls ``economically radical'' 
tax reforms _ simplifying an antiquated tax structure that has built 
up since the 1930s. The centerpiece of the plan is a 10 percent tax 
on all goods and services, which voters rejected outright at an election 
in 1993. Beazley promised something far less painful: creation of 
500,000 jobs. And he used a ``no tax'' promise to pull Labor close 
to victory. Labor was thrown out in a landslide victory for Howard 
in 1996. With the historical odds against him, Beazley led Labor to 
a strong recovery, probably capturing 16 of the 27 seats the party 
needed for outright victory, the ABC reported., using vote counts 
provided by the official Australian Election Commission. The corporation 
feeds results into the computer as they are counted officially, giving 
an almost real-time result on an electorate-by-electorate basis. The 
domestic news service Australian Associated Press also predicted a 
conservative victory, but with a much diminished majority. Labor needed 
to hold all its current electorates and win 27 more to seize a majority 
in the House of Representatives, the more powerful chamber in Australia's 
bicameral Parliament. Labor and the coalition had been in a dead heat 
for weeks, according to the polls. Casting his vote in his west coast 
electorate, Beazley predicted before counting began that there would 
be a clear result by late Saturday night. He was cautiously hopeful. 
Voting in his Sydney electorate, Howard said he was nervous about 
the outcome. Even though Howard retained control in the House of Representatives, 
where government is formed, polls have indicated minor parties or 
independents again will hold the balance of power in the upper house, 
meaning the government may have to negotiate to get bills passed. 
The ABC computer showed Senate voting trends in favor of minority 
party the Democrats, which looked likely to hold the balance of power. 
Howard tried to soften his tax plan by linking it to income tax cuts 
worth Australian dollars 13 billion (U.S. dlrs 7.6 billion) a year 
and has promised to abolish a variety of other wholesale taxes. But 
the income tax cuts are based on the uncertain assumption that the 
Australian economy will continue to grow 3.5 percent a year to keep 
the federal budget in surplus. Beazley promised to create a half-million 
jobs in three years and called for income tax cuts targeting low-income 
earners. His proposed cuts would have cost Australian dollars 3 billion 
(U.S. dlrs 1.8 billion), an amount he said would be affordable even 
under the International Monetary Fund's more modest growth projections. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>