<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981003.0670 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Latvians appeared to have narrowly approved their parliament's controversial 
measures to ease citizenship requirements for the country's hundreds 
of thousands of stateless Russians in a referendum Saturday, according 
to early results. A referendum held in conjunction with voting for 
the country's 100-seat parliament asked voters if they want to reject 
liberalizing citizenship law amendments that legislators passed in 
June. With votes counted from about 16 percent of the country's precincts, 
the changes were being approved by a 53-46 margin. The remainder apparently 
were blank or spoiled ballots. If the acceptance is borne out in the 
final results, the former Soviet republic will have headed off an 
unpleasant confrontation with the West. But whether the results would 
mollify Russia, which has rained denunciations on Latvia for its treatment 
of ethnic Russians, is in doubt. Although the changes remove years 
of waiting for citizenship applicants, the laws still require adults 
to have competence in Latvian, which many who grew up in all-Russian 
communities within Latvia regard as unreasonable. Russians make up 
45 percent of the country's 2.5 million population. The amendments 
were passed after a tense spring in which Russia threatened trade 
sanctions against its diminutive neighbor. Moscow mayor Yuri Luzhkov's 
accused Latvia of committing genocide. The West too was unhappy with 
Latvia, though its statements were more measured. The Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe urged changes and many officials 
predicted that the European Union, which Latvia ardently wants to 
join, would never let the country in unless it lowered the obstacles 
to citizenship. But after the amendments were passed, a referendum 
drive to overturn them began, spearheaded by nationalist politicians 
who claim Latvian national identity is imperiled. After Latvia became 
independent of the Soviet Union in 1991, citizenship was granted to 
ethnic Latvians and to anyone who had lived there prior to the Soviet 
annexation in 1940. That left out the hundreds of thousands of ethnic 
Russians who poured into Latvia during Soviet rule, and to their children 
_ even those born in Latvia. Today, about 452,000 of the country's 
740,000 ethnic Russians are without citizenship. Because they can't 
vote, they regarded Saturday's referendum with angry resignation. 
``I was born in Riga, I live in Riga, but I am Russian and can't vote. 
I don't like it here,'' said a young woman who gave her name only 
as Alex, selling cassettes in the vast market sprawling on the outskirts 
of downtown. But many people who could vote were annoyed because the 
referendum question was phrased confusingly: a ``yes'' vote meaning 
``no'' to the changes. ``Frankly, I didn't understand the issue or 
the ballot,'' said 79-year-old Dzetins Alois, who voted in the parliamentary 
election but not in the referendum. Some voting irregularities were 
reported, including President Guntis Ulmanis giving a television interview 
inside a polling station, and a polling place in the city of Jurmala 
failing to stamp about 200 ballots properly. Of the 21 parties and 
alliances seeking seats in the Saeima (pronounced SIGH-mah), the right-wing 
Fatherland and Freedom party of Prime Minister Guntars Krasts was 
the only major party campaigning to turn down the changes. On issues 
other than citizenship _ including to seek EU and NATO membership 
_ there was wide agreement among the parties. There was also broad 
support for the free-market reforms that have raised Latvia up from 
the stagnant Soviet era. Voter support for one party or another appeared 
to depend as much on the personality of leaders as on specific issues. 
In the early results, the new center-right Peoples Party was at the 
top with 26 percent. Party leader Andris Skele has said Latvia relies 
too much on transit trade to and from Russia, and said policies should 
also focus on producing goods in Latvia for export. The conservative 
Latvia's Way had 23 percent, followed by the Union of Social Democrats, 
Fatherland and Freedom and the New Party. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>