<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981003.0306 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President N. Bagabandi appealed for calm Saturday following the assassination 
of a prominent democratic leader, a killing that could further complicate 
a lengthy political crisis. Sanjaasuregiin Zorig, minister for infrastructure 
in the ruling Democratic Coalition and a possible candidate for prime 
minister, was axed and stabbed to death at his home late Friday night. 
The murder may further shake public confidence in the fledgling democracy, 
which has been embroiled for about four months in a political stalemate 
that has paralyzed work on crucial economic reforms. ``I challenge 
everyone to be disciplined about this serious crime that has shocked 
our society. I urge you not to get involved in any kind of sensationalist 
stories,'' Bagabandi said in a public address expressing condolences 
to the family of the slain politician. Bagabandi said he was confident 
that the attackers, who remained at large, would be brought to justice. 
The reason for Zorig's assassination remained unclear. Some analysts 
speculated that the killing could have been linked to organized crime 
or to a private business deal. Zorig, a popular figure who played 
a leading role in the 1990 democratic revolution that ended seven 
decades of Stalinist rule, had been widely expected to be named next 
week as a possible successor to Prime Minister Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj, 
who resigned on July 24 along with his entire cabinet. ``I can only 
express my shock and dismay at this tragic event. Zorig was widely 
respected as a leader of the democratic movement in Mongolia,'' said 
U.S. Ambassador Alphonse F. La Porta. The ruling coalition has considered 
and failed to agree on four earlier candidates. Zorig, a 36-year-old 
Moscow-educated former social sciences professor and a member of parliament 
since 1990, would have become the fifth nominee. The crisis was precipitated 
when the three-month-old coalition government lost a vote of confidence 
following a feud over whether to merge a state bank with a private 
bank. The opposition Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party, the former 
communists, accused the government of organizing the merger in a way 
that financially benefited its members and protested by boycotting 
the Great Hural, Mongolia's parliament, throwing proceedings into 
turmoil. The coalition government had 30 days to reorganize itself 
and nominate a new prime minister, but has failed to do so. The political 
impasse has prevented work on crucial economic legislation. Mongolia, 
a landlocked Central Asian nation flanked by Russia and China, used 
to be dependent on subsidies from Moscow and has seen its economy 
weaken precipitously since the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991. 
The vast, sparsely populated land was once the heart of the largest 
empire the Earth ever knew. But according to World Bank estimates, 
36 percent of its 2 million people now live in poverty. Inflation 
topped 30 percent last year and unemployment is high. Forty percent 
of the population are nomadic herders. Peaceful protests in 1990 forced 
the pro-Soviet People's Revolutionary Party to drop communism and 
allow free and fair multiparty elections. Its 75-year rule ended with 
a 1996 parliamentary election that swept the reformist Democratic 
Union into office and won accolades for the nation's progress toward 
democracy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>