<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981003.0130.1487 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the era of cell phones, hidden cameras and the world wide web, 
some say peeping toms have moved out of the bushes and into the mainstream. 
Garrick Utley reports the Starr report could be just the beginning. 
When I was alone with miss Lewinsky -- If you think you have heard 
everything, including Bill Clinton's tapes, if you think you have 
read everything, the Starr report and the thousands of pages of transcripts 
and documentation, if you think nothing is sacred or private any more, 
including Linda Tripp's tapes -- listen to this. Book stores are normally 
the home of more restrained and refined thoughts and works. But there 
are plans to publish next month a book that is nothing more, nor less, 
than the verbatim transcripts of private cellular telephone conversations 
which have been intercepted. Isn't that illegal? It appears to be. 
Is it going to happen? Yes, according to the publisher. On its web 
site, incommunicado press, a small desktop publisher in California, 
claims that, "I listen: a document of digital voyeurism," will offer 
phone sex, drug deals, death threats and nervous breakdowns. It calls 
it "A commentary on human relationships and the outdated concept of 
privacy." Can it get away with publishing private phone conversations? 
Whether it's in the form of a book or a newspaper, the equation becomes 
a little more complicated because there are free speech rights involved. 
Whether it is tapping into cell phone conversations or marketing videos 
of the president's grand jury testimony, the question increasingly 
seems to be not what should be available to the public, but what can 
you get away with to make a Buck or hurt your opponent? The Starr 
report is not the only example. The chair desires to make a statement. 
Remember the cell phone taping of house speaker Newt Gingrich last 
year, as he discussed how to handle a congressional inquiry into his 
ethics violations? And the couple that listened in and released the 
tape? Oh, it was exciting. I mean I was so -- so excited to think 
that I actually heard a real politician's voice. Get outta here. Back 
in a more innocent age, the TV show "candid camera" invaded people's 
privacy. But the scenes were never offensive, and the subjects had 
to give their approval before the film could be shown. Today, we are 
seeing how sensation sells. And with that comes the audacious effort 
to turn the idea of the right to know into the freedom to sell anything, 
even your most intimate conversations. But will people want to buy 
it? That depends on who they, or we, really are -- viewers of life 
or voyeurs. Garrick Utley, CNN, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>