<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981003.1130.1494 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
a california publishing firm says it's making public some private 
phone conversations of people talking sex, drugs and much more. garrick 
utley reports. when i was alone with ms. lewinsky -- if you think 
you have heard everything, including bill clinton's tapes, if you 
think you have read everything, the starr report and the thousands 
of pages of transcripts and documentation, if you think nothing is 
sacred or private any more, including linda tripp's tapes -- listen 
to this. book stores are normally the home of more restrained and 
refined thoughts and works. but there are plans to publish next month 
a book that is nothing more, nor less, than the verbatim transcripts 
of private cellular telephone conversations which have been intercepted. 
isn't that illegal? it appears to be. is it going to happen? yes, 
according to the publisher. on its web site, incommunicado press, 
a small desktop publisher in california, claims that, "i listen: a 
document of digital voyeurism," will offer phone sex, drug deals, 
death threats and nervous breakdowns. it calls it "a commentary on 
human relationships and the outdated concept of privacy." can it get 
away with publishing private phone conversations? whether it's in 
the form of a book or a newspaper, the equation becomes a little more 
complicated because there are free speech rights involved. whether 
it is tapping into cell phone conversations or marketing videos of 
the president's grand jury testimony, the question increasingly seems 
to be not what should be available to the public, but what can you 
get away with to make a buck or hurt your opponent? the starr report 
is not the only example. the chair desires to make a statement. remember 
the cell phone tapping of house speaker newt gingrich last year, as 
he discussed how to handle a congressional inquiry into his ethics 
violations? and the couple that listened in and released the tape? 
oh, it was exciting. i mean i was so -- so excited to think that i 
actually heard a real politician's voice. get outta here. back in 
a more innocent age, the tv show "candid camera" invaded people's 
privacy. but the scenes were never offensive, and the subjects had 
to give their approval before the film could be shown. today, we are 
seeing how sensation sells. and with that comes the audacious effort 
to turn the idea of the right to know into the freedom to sell anything, 
even your most intimate conversations. but will people want to buy 
it? that depends on who they, or we, really are -- viewers of life 
or voyeurs. garrick utley, cnn, new york. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>