<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981003.1600.1491 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just like their male counterparts, women are changing through the 
generations, and their reading material in the 1990s is changing with 
them. Margaret Lowrie has more. Glamour, lifestyle and sex -- how 
to get a man and keep him. From Moscow to London, young, professional 
women buy magazines just as their mothers did. But today's journals 
are bursting with advice on how to be smart, sexy and sassy. I think 
women's magazines have come a long way from the hearts and Flowers 
scenario of love and romance and sex. And I think that, you know, 
in that way, I think we just help women to laugh at life, and laugh 
at the realities of life, but also just to inspire them a bit and 
make them feel good, really. Hello, fashions. Some say, thanks to 
the sexual revolution and women's lib, today's woman doesn't have 
to fight quite so hard to get that job or keep her man. In short, 
Henry higgins' dream is coming true -- women appear to be more like 
men, casting men adrift in a sea of social and sexual politics. Since 
their launch on the British market in the early 1990s, a new breed 
of men's magazines have redefined men's roles from new man to new 
lad, most women's magazines still harbor a dream of an ideal man -- 
part dreamboat, part househusband, but still the main breadwinner. 
Men's titles glorify beer and loutish behavior associated with so-called 
new lads, embodied by rock star Liam Gallagher of oasis and soccer 
player Paul gascogine. It's been so unfashionable for some time to 
be a lad, and it's come back in vogue, really. Critics say many of 
today's male magazines show men feel increasingly challenged by the 
independence of the '90s woman. Well, my personal theory is that it's 
like a postfeminist thing. Suddenly, you know, women sort of have 
a certain level of equality now, so it's all right for men to reclaim 
their position, as it were, and, you know, have a laugh and enjoy 
looking at women, and all of that kind of thing. I don't think it's 
a backlash against feminism. I think it's more a backlash against 
what was available to men at that time. Still, the dominant image 
is that of the new lad, surrounded by scantily clad women, scattered 
amongst the latest boys' toys and fashion advice. It's an awful lot 
more than just scantily clad women and, you know, articles about drink. 
I mean, it's got every facet of life contained within it. Derek harbinson 
believes that his generation is misunderstood and misused by ad men. 
It's just a magazine, and people get really heated up about it and 
go, "oh, but it's some sort of huge, you know, social policy document," 
you know, it's just a magazine by a load of blokes who just want to 
have a good time. After all, it's not a lifestyle Bible for brain 
surgeons, just a magazine for the new lads. Margaret Lowrie, CNN, 
London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>