<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981003.0130.0056 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The White House says the latest batch of evidence released by the 
house Judiciary committee is a partisan process designed for partisan 
gain. 4,500 pages of evidence were released Friday including transcripts 
of testimony from Linda Tripp, Vernon Jordan, and the president's 
personal secretary, Betty Currie. Currie's testimony paints a picture 
of a very worried President Clinton the night the Monica Lewinsky 
story broke. Currie said the president called her after midnight, 
saying something would be in the "Washington Post" and it was not 
good. That call was prompted by a report on the Internet that journalists 
were about to break a major story about his relationship with an intern. 
Also released were transcripts of Tripp's secretly recorded conversations 
with Lewinsky. Candy Crowley has details. It is standard girl talk 
-- "I think your highlights were too white." "Well, he could fix that." 
"Yeah." "So, I think I'll tell him pale blonde, right?" "Or golden." 
"Okay." "You know, something warm." They talk about hair and shopping 
and work and fashion. "What my mom told me is that, that you can wear 
silk in the winter, which I didn't know. I thought you couldn't." 
"Yes, you can." "Oh, it would look nice with grey." 29 tapes in all. 
Hours and hours of girl talk. Surprising only for its banality except 
for the exceptions. They commiserate about weight problems and guy 
problems. Except the guy is the president of the United States. "I 
hate him. I hate him. I hate him." "Well, if you really hated him, 
you'd pack your bags and scoot out." They talk about clothes. Except, 
the clothes are bought in anticipation of visiting the president of 
the United States. "I bought a beautiful, beautiful, rad red, very 
thin silk sweater top." "Oh, that's "-- "it's for my next visit if 
I ever have one again." They talk about sex, except it's sex with 
the leader of the western world. "You're so good at it. No wonder 
he likes phone sex with you. You're just like a little Marilyn Monroe 
vixen. I, I would -- I --I -- I know in my wildest dreams I could 
never have phone sex." "Oh yes you could." It's hard to figure Linda 
Tripp. She is 25 years older with children almost as old as Lewinsky. 
The conversation has elements of motherly concern expressed in a vocabulary 
decidedly unmotherly. "Your well-being is really the most important 
thing and that's why I" -- "I go through flips with him, where I want 
to - kick him in the -- so that they flatten into little pancakes 
and he can never use them again." Sometimes the roles are reversed 
as Lewinsky tries to manage Tripp's life of the "have you found yourself 
a husband yet?" "Yeah, right. No husband for me thanks. I'm going 
to stay single forever and be happy." "why?" "I have no desire, none. 
I -- I'm" -- "you want a boyfriend. Lewinsky then suggests that Tripp 
needs some sex. What makes it hardest of all to figure out the real 
Linda Tripp is that unlike Monica she knew these conversations were 
being taped. Even as she was pushing record and moving Monica Lewinsky's 
life into a maelstrom, Tripp offered this comfort -- "it's going to 
work out, because I have -- I have true faith that you're going to 
go up to New York. You're going to get a wonderful job. This is all 
going to go away." Asked later, in grand jury testimony about the 
relationship, Tripp said, "it became very intense in a very odd way." 
It did indeed. Candy Crowley, CNN, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>