<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981003.1830.0994 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"In focus" this evening, concerns about the safety of those amusement 
park rides. NBC's Jim Cummins on who's watching and who is not. They 
are usually safe. According to the most recent statistics, there are 
only about 16,000 injuries a year. By one estimate, twice that many 
people are hurt each year while using shaving equipment. But when 
accidents do occur at amusement parks, the incidents send shockwaves 
through the communities involved. At this carnival in Austin, Texas, 
last March, something went terribly wrong with a whirling ride called 
himalaya. 15-year-old Leslie Lane was killed. She came flying out, 
and she hit the wall over here. And there was another girl that fell 
out. And I think she had broke her leg because her leg was twisted. 
And there was a little-bitty boy who fell out, and his nose was bleeding. 
An investigation determined that the safety bar which was supposed 
to hold passengers in their seats gave way. This week, a grand jury 
in Austin decided that the company which owns the ride should be punished. 
In what may be an unprecedented action, the owners of B&B amusements, 
their employees and the two men who inspected himalaya were charged 
with murder. The indictment says that on the night of the accident, 
the ride was being operated at an excessive speed, even though it 
had inadequate safety equipment and had not been adequately inspected. 
The maximum penalty -- 99 years in prison. Defense attorneys say the 
charges are unfair and inappropriate. They could be reduced in the 
weeks ahead. A Texas law professor says getting a murder conviction 
in a case like this will be difficult. The prosecution has to prove 
one of two things. Either the defendants actually and consciously 
wanted the victim to die, or that they acted knowingly, that they 
were aware of a certainty that what they were doing would cause the 
victim to die. And that's a pretty steep Burden. After the accident 
in Austin, the U.S. consumer product safety commission issued three 
safety alerts about the himalaya. And in a separate action, the commission 
urged all states to immediately inspect mobile rides called ranger, 
kamikaze or hi-flyer. While most states have some mandatory regulations 
or inspection programs, eight states don't require any safety inspections 
for amusement park rides. Six others, including Texas, permit private 
inspections rather than official government checks. The industry points 
out that horseplay by patrons who disobey park rules causes far more 
mishaps than faulty equipment does. And as amusement park rides try 
to provide more thrills and chills, accident prevention continues 
to be a top priority. Jim Cummins, NBC news, Dallas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>