<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The White House that the American public sees is a place of grandeur 
and high purpose, the shrine where presidents greet foreign leaders 
and host glittering state dinners, where leaders brandish the veto 
pen and solemnly announce the dispatch of military forces overseas. 
But seen from Secret Service post E-6, a small desk outside the Oval 
Office, the White House is a place of intrigue, sometimes juvenile, 
and of mordant humor about the president's private life, according 
to the latest batch of testimony released by Congress. The narrow 
hallways of the West Wing _ the revered seat of American power _ are 
populated with ``rug rats'' and ``hall surfers,'' young aides with 
White House passes who hope to catch a glimpse of the leader of the 
free world on his way to the bathroom or to grab a can of Diet Coke. 
Competition for boxes of M&AMP;M candies bearing the presidential 
seal is almost as intense as that for serious ``face time'' with the 
president. Most outsiders would imagine that the president's appointment 
book looks like that of an orthodontist, scheduled to the quarter-hour. 
In fact, when Clinton is at the White House, he often has large blocks 
of uninterrupted time, ordered by Erskine Bowles, the chief of staff, 
who wanted the president to have quiet hours to think, read and make 
unscripted telephone calls. Clinton's weekends are also often free 
for such unscheduled ``office time.'' From the accounts provided by 
witnesses in the Lewinsky investigation, Clinton spent some substantial 
periods of that time with Monica Lewinsky and, later, consulting with 
lawyers and aides trying to contain the potential damage from the 
relationship. The 4,600 pages of testimony, tapes and interviews compiled 
by Kenneth Starr, the Whitewater independent counsel, provide an unprecedented 
upstairs-downstairs view of life in the White House, a near-contemporaneous 
account of the daily routine of the West Wing. In the Clinton White 
House, according to grand jury testimony published Friday, Secret 
Service officers consult with an Oval Office steward on how best to 
dispose of lipstick-stained towels and glasses. A Secret Service agent 
challenges Ms. Lewinsky, then a 21-year-old intern, about her business 
in the West Wing until the president directly orders him to admit 
her to the Oval Office and to close the door behind him. As in previous 
White Houses, access to the Oval Office is tightly controlled by the 
Secret Service and the president's watchful secretaries. But one very 
junior employee, the West Wing receptionist, is granted virtually 
unlimited access to the Oval Office on a par with that of the first 
lady and the vice president until the president's longtime secretary, 
Nancy Hernreich, cuts her off. One overwhelming impression from the 
documents is how little privacy the president actually has. His movements 
are traced almost by the step from his bedroom to his office, as Secret 
Service officers broadcast his location second by second through their 
secure radio system. Staffers and bodyguards always know who is with 
him in the Oval Office, even behind closed doors and drawn drapes. 
And although Secret Service officers are strictly instructed not to 
discuss what they see and hear around the West Wing, gossip spreads 
like kudzu. Many of the rumors appear in the documents accompanying 
Starr's report to Congress. The independent counsel makes no effort 
to discern the truth of much of the gossip, and the House Judiciary 
Committee released much of the material unedited. ``I mean, we're 
the Secret Service,'' Gary Byrne testified last summer. ``We're there 
all the time. I mean, we're sort of like doorknobs. I know that's 
kind of a little hard to fathom, but I mean people have had incredible 
personal conversations in front of me.'' Byrne said he befriended 
Bayani Nelvis, the Navy steward who tended the serving pantry adjacent 
to the Oval Office, just around the corner from Byrne's post E-6. 
The Secret Service officer helped Nelvis to reach dishes and glassware 
on high shelves; the steward confided his concerns about the president 
to Byrne. One day Nelvis, who was widely known in the West Wing as 
``Nel,'' complained to Byrne about some lipstick-stained towels that 
the president had left in his study. Nelvis told the officer that 
he was tired of cleaning up that stuff, according to Byrne's testimony. 
Byrne suggested that Nelvis discard the towels rather than sending 
them to the laundry. ``My fear was that regardless of whose _ if there 
was lipstick on there, regardless of whose it was, that when the people 
that did the laundry saw it, you know, I just didn't want to give 
anybody any more fuel for any more rumors about the president,'' he 
said. Although Byrne already had his suspicions about Ms. Lewinsky, 
he said he thought that the stains had been left by another woman 
who worked in the White House. Steven Pape, a uniformed officer of 
the Secret Service assigned to the southwest gate of the White House 
complex, told the grand jury he offered a wager about the president's 
behavior to a Secret Service trainee on a Saturday morning in August 
1997, when Ms. Lewinsky showed up at his post, ostensibly to see Betty 
Currie, the president's private secretary. He admitted Ms. Lewinsky 
and then told the trainee, ``This is probably the president's mistress, 
so treat her, you know, decent, but again, don't break the rules for 
her.'' Then he bet the new officer that Clinton would leave the White 
House residence and head for the Oval Office within 10 minutes to 
meet Ms. Lewinsky, even though the president was not customarily in 
his office early on Saturday morning. ``And I almost lost the bet,'' 
Pape told the grand jury in August. ``It was nine minutes and 40 or 
50 seconds before _ before he came down for that appointment.'' Pape, 
a seven-year Secret Service veteran, said he was troubled by another 
of Ms. Lewinsky's visits to the White House, this one in October 1997. 
``She had come, it seems like, on days that she would come, one of 
them particularly was kind of depressing, because I want to say it 
was the president and the first lady's, either their anniversary or, 
or something to that effect,'' Pape told the grand jury. ``And I just 
made a mental thought of that was not the way to celebrate a traditional 
family anniversary, in my opinion.'' Ms. Lewinsky visited Clinton 
in the small study off the Oval Office on Oct. 11, 1997, a Saturday, 
for nearly an hour to discuss efforts to find her a job in New York. 
The president said that he had spoken to Bowles about getting her 
a favorable job recommendation and said he would enlist the aid of 
Vernon Jordan, a Washington power broker and confidant of the president. 
Ms. Lewinsky testified that although their sexual relationship had 
ended several months earlier, Clinton held her by the arm and kissed 
her forehead. The day was the Clintons' 22nd wedding anniversary. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>