<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The latest addition to Boston's baseball narrative was supposed to 
be Pete Schourek, the lightly regarded pitcher who Manager Jimy Williams 
decided to start over the sensational Pedro Martinez Saturday in Game 
4. But instead of Schourek, who pitched five and one-third shutout 
innings before leaving the field with the lead, it was All-Star Tom 
Gordon who put on the poor performance that will be lamented by Red 
Sox fans for years to come. Gordon, the magnificent closer who finished 
the season with 43 straight saves, took the mound at the start of 
the eighth inning, with the Red Sox clinging to a 1-0 lead. With 46 
saves to his credit, Gordon seemed like a lock to shut down the Indians 
and send the series back to Cleveland for the fifth and deciding game. 
But the man whom nearly everyone in Boston affectionately calls ``Flash'' 
sputtered, giving up Cleveland's only runs in the Indians' dramatic 
2-1 victory, which earned them a spot opposite the Yankees in the 
American League Championship Series. The Indians defeated the Yankees 
by three games to two in last year's division series en route to their 
second World Series appearance in three seasons. David Justice, the 
Game 2 hero for the Indians, came through again Saturday, knocking 
in both Cleveland runs with a line-drive double that, on one bounce, 
hit the center-field wall 420 feet from home plate. Justice's smash 
drove in Kenny Lofton and Omar Vizquel, both of whom had singled. 
It was Vizquel's first hit in 15 at-bats this series. The decision 
by Williams to put in Gordon in the eighth was questionable because 
the right-hander had not started in that inning all season. He had 
gotten the final six outs in two games, but never started the final 
two innings. Just minutes before Gordon left the bullpen, the manager 
had looked brilliant for his gutsy decision to stick with Schourek 
when the local media and fans were calling for Martinez. With Schourek 
holding the Indians scoreless on two hits through five innings, the 
Red Sox seemed destined to head into the series finale with their 
ace rested and ready to go. Schourek was not threatened until the 
fifth, when he began having control problems. After Vaughn made a 
diving grab to rob Jim Thome of a base hit, Schourek walked Richie 
Sexson and Sandy Alomar Jr., and when his first pitch to the No. 9 
batter, Enrique Wilson, was off the plate, it marked the seventh straight 
ball he had thrown. Schourek managed to get Wilson out on a fly ball 
to center field, but Sexson moved to third on the play to put men 
on the corners with two out and Lofton at bat. Schourek ran the count 
full before forcing the speedy leadoff batter to fly out to center 
for the third straight time. Though he had allowed only one hit, it 
was surprising to see Schourek return for the sixth, if only for a 
few minutes. He got Vizquel to pop out but was ripped for a double 
by Justice. Williams called in reliever Derek Lowe, sending Schourek 
out to a standing ovation. Schourek's counterpart, Bartolo Colon, 
was just as strong. With his fastball clocking nearly 100 miles per 
hour, he kept the Red Sox off the scoreboard until Nomar Garciaparra 
tagged his first pitch of the fourth inning an estimated 411 feet 
into the Boston bullpen behind right-center field for the game's only 
run until Gordon entered. INSIDE PITCH: The Red Sox have now lost 
16 of their last 17 postseason games, starting with the infamous Bill 
Buckner game in the 1986 World Series. ... Cleveland has lost the 
opener of its last seven playoff series. But it has ended up winning 
four of them. ... Manny Ramirez's two home runs in Game 3 gave him 
a franchise-record 11 over his 41-game postseason career and put him 
in first place in the category among active players. His solo homer 
in the ninth off reliever Dennis Eckersley was his second in two career 
at-bats against the 24-year veteran, who turned 44 Saturday. ... Ramirez 
and teammates Bartolo Colon and David Justice wore Darryl Strawberry's 
No. 39 on their hats in honor of Yankee outfielder, who Saturday had 
surgery for colon cancer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>