<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a sign that a new tobacco settlement deal may be near, state attorneys 
general nationwide will be told this week about the details of a plan 
intended to resolve their lawsuits against the industry, lawyers familiar 
with those discussions said. The briefings, which are expected to 
begin on Tuesday, are the strongest indication yet that negotiators 
representing eight states and two major cigarette makers have resolved 
most major differences between them, said those lawyers, who spoke 
on the condition of anonymity. On Friday, Attorney General Christine 
Gregoire of Washington state told reporters in a telephone conference 
call that negotiators still had three unresolved issues, including 
how to deal with smaller producers who do not take part in a settlement. 
But two lawyers who were briefed on the status of the talks said Saturday 
that they believed the discussions were far more advanced than Ms. 
Gregoire had suggested. The purpose of the meetings this week is to 
brief state attorneys generals about the status of settlement talks 
and solicit their reaction to details of the proposal, the lawyers 
added. Several lawyers interviewed Saturday provided differing views 
on the status of the talks, but all said they expected that a new 
settlement plan would emerge soon. The plan is likely to cause debate 
among public health advocates because it apparently contains fewer 
advertising and marketing restrictions on cigarette makers than the 
$368.5 billion settlement proposal reached last year between state 
officials and the tobacco industry. Cigarette producers would still 
be allowed to advertise their products both inside and outside retail 
stores, though there may be restrictions on the size of signs, lawyers 
briefed on the proposal said. They added that the plan, at present, 
also did not apparently contain restrictions on tobacco advertisements 
in magazines or call for the elimination of advertising figures like 
the Marlboro Man. Cigarette makers would also be allowed to continue 
existing sponsorships of sports events like car racing, another marketing 
outlet that would have been eliminated under last year's deal. That 
proposal, attacked by anti-smoking groups as inadequate, collapsed 
in the congressional debate earlier this year over national tobacco 
legislation. Ms. Gregoire, who is leading the states involved in the 
talks, declined on Friday to discuss details of the settlement discussion. 
Scott Williams, a spokesman for the tobacco industry, also declined 
to comment. Still, even the prospect of a settlement has already touched 
off a sharp debate between some states over the division of settlement 
proceeds, which industry analysts on Wall Street expect to reach between 
$170 billion and $200 billion over 25 years. Because the state lawsuits 
were brought to recoup Medicaid expenses for treating smoking-related 
illness, some officials have advocated that settlement money be divided 
based on each state's percentage of the national Medicaid population. 
But lawyers for other states have contended that they should get a 
greater cut because they sued earlier or worked harder to prepare 
their cases against the industry. ``There are some states that haven't 
done anything,'' said one of those lawyers. The current round of talks, 
which began in early June, has moved ahead in fits and starts as tobacco 
producers, emboldened by a recent string of court victories, have 
taken a hard line. Cigarette makers are seeking to settle the state 
lawsuits because they view them as a potential financial threat that 
has kept down the price of their stock. Along with Washington, the 
states involved in the last round of talks are California, Colorado, 
New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma and Pennsylvania. 
In recent weeks, only two of the nation's four largest cigarette makers 
_ Philip Morris Companies and Lorillard Tobacco _ have been involved 
in settlement discussions. But the other two producers, R.J. Reynolds 
Tobacco Co. and Brown &AMP; Williamson Tobacco Corp., are expected 
to take part in any settlement deal, both industry and state officials 
said. Since last year, tobacco producers have settled Medicaid-related 
lawsuits brought by four states _ Florida, Minnesota, Mississippi 
and Texas _ agreeing to pay about $36 billion over 25 years. Under 
the Minnesota plan, the most sweeping of the settlements, producers 
agreed, among other things, to drop all tobacco advertising on billboards 
and buses, to finance smoking-cessation programs and to refrain from 
making any false statements about the health effects of smoking. Ms. 
Gregoire said she was optimistic about a settlement but would be disappointed 
if negotiators did not achieve significantly more than lawyers for 
Minnesota did. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>