<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nicholas Smith, who has homes in Britain and France, now also has 
one in this small town of 10,000 residents. To some here, his choice 
signifies how far Newberry has come. Smith is the conductor of the 
South Carolina Philharmonic Orchestra, based 40 miles southeast in 
Columbia. Yet in June he rented a second-floor apartment over an international 
printing business as his local home. He spends about 20 weeks here 
each year during the season, which runs from October through April. 
He wanted the space so badly that he moved in before the three other 
apartments in the building were finished. ``It's absolutely amazing 
what's been achieved here,'' he said. ``The place itself is a jewel.'' 
The rustling of rebirth blows smartly through the 10 blocks considered 
to be downtown, thanks to an ambitious plan to redefine downtown Newberry 
as a center for the arts. The 115-year-old Newberry Opera House, across 
the street from Smith's apartment, provided the focus. Local residents 
raised $5 million to renovate the building, which reopened in June 
with a performance by Hal Holbrook, the actor, and his wife, Dixie 
Carter, a singer and star of the television series ``Designing Women.'' 
The opening was the first time in 40 years that the sounds of performing 
arts filled the 426-seat hall. ``Newberry is almost not recognizable 
as the same town it was a few years ago,'' said Ernest Shealy, the 
director of the Newberry Visitors Center, housed in an elegant former 
courthouse building adjacent to the Opera House. Most of the downtown 
buildings have been renovated or are in some phase of repair, or have 
just been bought by a new owner with the intention to renovate. In 
the last year a dozen businesses have opened, including five antiques 
stores, two art-supply dealers, two gift shops and a newspaper/coffee 
stand. About half of the dozen or so recently built downtown apartments 
are rented at an average of $500 for a one-bedroom to $1,000 for a 
two-bedroom. Like Newberry, a number of Southern cities have used 
the arts as a catalyst for rejuvenating beleaguered downtowns. Asheville, 
N.C., has seen a resurgence since the construction of Pack Place, 
a two-theater, four-museum complex. Now the downtown has many more 
permanent residents, and longtime residents say so many people flock 
there at night that parking is a problem. In Greenville, S.C., some 
formerly empty and worn buildings now house restaurants and businesses. 
The rebirth began with the construction in the early '90s of the Peace 
Center, a performing-arts hall named for its largest benefactor, the 
Peace family, former owner of The Greenville News and other newspapers. 
The hall incorporated an abandoned textile mill into its design. Conxus 
Communication, a paging company, moved into a building vacated in 
the '80s when J.C. Penney moved to a new mall on Greenville's outskirts. 
After a renovation, the Main Street building has become Conxus' corporate 
headquarters. In addition, a $63-million arena, to be the home of 
a minor-league hockey team, opened Sept. 3 with a performance by the 
singer Janet Jackson. And at the edge of downtown, buildings to house 
the South Carolina Governor's School for the Arts are taking shape. 
Greenville outbid a number of cities, including Newberry, to get the 
school, which will bring arts students from all over the state to 
live and study. But for Newberry, the arts rebirth seems to some a 
more difficult achievement. With a relatively small population, Newberry 
must draw from other cities to make it happen. ``At the outset, it 
was a leap of faith,'' said Deborah Smith, the executive director 
of the Newberry Opera House, who is not related to the conductor. 
``There were a few visionaries who thought the Opera House was the 
key.'' Ms. Smith has managed to bring in a number of well-known acts, 
including a new version of the Mamas and Papas, the '60s folk-singing 
group. For the new season, the Opera House has signed on Eli Wallach 
and Anne Jackson, the actor couple, and the singers B.J. Thomas, Judy 
Collins and Glen Campbell. The Lettermen and the Kingston Trio will 
also perform here. Ms. Smith says the Opera House's intimacy makes 
performers feel comfortable and able to connect with audiences. ``The 
back row is closer than some front rows,'' she said, referring to 
larger opera houses. ``You don't get any opera glasses in the Opera 
House.'' She added that she hoped to see 50,000 patrons in the first 
full season at the Opera House, which has a capacity of more than 
400. ``There are 1.7 million people between Greenville and Columbia,'' 
she said. ``It is far easier for them to come to Newberry'' for entertainment 
than to go back to the downtowns in the bigger cities, she said. Construction 
inside the French Gothic Opera House began in 1995 after several years 
of planning. The work was clearly a renovation, not a restoration. 
The downstairs had for many years been home to City Hall, and pictures 
did not show the original colors. Designers chose blue, wine and mustard 
for the interior because they were common in the 1880s, when the house 
was built. After City Hall moved into a former bank building, the 
downstairs was transformed into a grand lobby, thanks to a $500,000 
gift from an executive of Duke Power Co. who grew up here. On the 
technical side, the sound, lights and hydraulic lift for the orchestra 
pit are considered state of the art. Bose Corp., a maker of sound 
equipment, donated the sound system. Ten thousand square feet of space 
was added to accommodate rehearsals and equipment. Now city planners 
are turning their attention to downtown streets, installing Victorian-style 
lighting and more attractive landscaping thanks to $350,000 allocated 
by the city and the federal governments. Hugh Turner has seen the 
transformation close up. As the owner of Turner's Jewelry Store for 
35 years, Turner stayed on Main Street even as the Ritz Theater closed 
and Roses Department Store moved to the Route 76 bypass outside town. 
By 1991, 22 stores on Main Street were empty. ``I'm one of the few 
who saw it through and had hope and faith,'' said Turner. In 1994, 
what some saw as the final assault on downtown occurred with the closing 
of the last two department stores. Abandoned buildings rotted, and 
the roof on the building across the street from the Opera House leaked 
so badly that rainfall seemed almost the same inside as out. Now, 
Turner feels so heady about downtown's prospects that he bought the 
building next door to his jewelry store as an investment. Shealy, 
the Visitors Center director, said that 16 of 62 buildings are vacant 
on Main Street, but that nine of them were being restored. Three more 
were bought recently by developers who intend to renovate them. To 
maintain the flavor of the restored buildings, Newberry created an 
architectural review board to oversee changes to buildings downtown. 
The resurrection has lapped over to residential real estate as well. 
Several Victorian and colonial homes near the downtown are in various 
stages of renovation, including a 5,000-square-foot house now on the 
market for $169,000. The owners of the four-bedroom house had intended 
to retire to Newberry, but sickness in the family made them decide 
to stay in New Jersey. Nearby, the asking price of a 3,700-square-foot, 
five-bedroom, three-bath house with a traditional design is $174,500. 
``Newberry has always had the attraction of those Old South homes,'' 
said Sinclair Kenan, a real-estate broker. ``And it is a great retirement 
haven, close to Columbia, Atlanta, the beach, the mountains.'' For 
Smith, the conductor, Newberry looks totally unlike the place he saw 
for the first time four years ago, when he took over as musical director 
of the Philharmonic. ``So much love and care has been put into this,'' 
he said. ``And those are the things that are so lacking nowadays.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>