<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
These days, walking any distance to go fishing is like leaping to 
pluck a gleaming apple off a bough and eating it on the spot. The 
scenario strikes a poignant, familiar chord in all of us. But few 
people actually do it. We buy our apples at the supermarket and when 
we get a chance to fish, we drive right up to the roadside pullout 
beside the river and jump out, ready to go. Thus, Richard Franklin 
and I decided that hiking in to fish for brook trout in a remote pond 
near this upstate community in the Catskills would be a novel way 
to end the trout season. Wild brookies, woefully sensitive and unspeakably 
lovely creatures, have gone the way of walking. These days, most flyfishers 
want to match wits with tough, wily brown trout or zesty rainbows, 
neither of which is native to Northeastern waters. Moreover, we can 
drive our loaded sports utility vehicles within casting distance of 
them. Meanwhile, the hapless native brookie is steadily pushed into 
the ever-diminishing nook of cold, pure water by its more hardy and 
flexible cousins, and by the degradation of the environment. We sometimes 
forget that a creature need not be fierce to be quintessentially wild. 
An hour into our hike, bearing unwieldy inflated float tubes on our 
backs like gaudy blue-and-tan balloons, we were right back at square 
one. We had taken three wrong trails, and broken a sweat in doing 
so. We felt ashamed, with good reason. In his own way, each of us 
was thinking, ``So it's come to this.'' But we started off again, 
marching uphill, through stands of sturdy oak, cherry, beech and ash 
trees. We hiked about two miles. Then, off in the distance below us, 
I saw through the blazing fall foliage the dark glint of water. A 
20-pound porcupine, a creature with no reason to run even at the worst 
of times, allowed us to approach within about 15 feet before it flared 
its neck and rump to display its ivory quills. It didn't even bother 
to turn head-on to confront us. The porcupine stood sideways, regarded 
us and then waddled off along the shoreline. Soon we had strapped 
on our flippers and plopped into the float tubes. These rigs, ingenious 
variations on the inner tube, allow anglers to maneuver and fish freely 
in still water of any depth. The trade-off is that you look like a 
floating bathtub toy, and feel as if you were nestled in a cushy Barcalounger. 
The only thing missing is the remote. But the sensation is misleading, 
because these ``belly boats'' are quiet and unobtrusive, ideally suited 
for the low-impact approach that befits fishing in remote, pristine 
waters. I called over to Richard. The ghastly echo of my voice startled 
me. By virtue of its surroundings, this pond demanded absolute silence. 
While neither of us had experienced that natural mandate in a long 
time, we grew accustomed to it quickly. And under that mantle of silence, 
wild brook trout tipped up their snouts and gently sipped tiny yellow 
mayflies from the surface of the black water. Brookies are neither 
discriminating feeders nor spectacular fighters when stung by the 
hook. When it comes to that ``man vs. fish'' thing, they just don't 
get it, not any more than the great herds of bison understood the 
nature of the chase in the heyday of the great buffalo hunt. They 
just stood there and fell when shot. Likewise, brook trout will usually 
take any old fly, the gaudier the better, if you throw it in front 
of them. But even that is sometimes easier said than done. The brookies 
of the pond were elusive, rising sporadically. By the time we cast 
to a rise, the fish were long gone. This was not the game of skill 
that flyfishers crave to play with steadily rising trout. It was much 
more natural than that. Dead trees stood like giant bones at the marshy 
end of the pond, and behind them the colored hardwoods and handsome 
dark pines shivered in the light breeze and sparkled in the clear 
sunlight. Eventually, we paddled over to some odd structures barely 
visible on the far shore of the pond. It turned out that they were 
part of a spillway, slab concrete and steel pipe, man-made. But in 
the deep hole near the outflow we saw the fish _ half a dozen of 15 
or 16 inches, with broad olive backs. The conspicuous ivory edging 
on their fins identified them as brookies. The fish hung suspended 
in the water like paintings on a wall. Occasionally, one would leisurely 
swim a lap of the pool. It was almost spawning time, and the big brookies 
probably gathered there because a hint of flow deceptively suggested 
the existence of a tributary in which they could find ideal spawning 
habitat. It didn't seem quite right to fish for them from atop a concrete 
culvert, but I did anyway. I didn't catch any. I guess at some level 
all of us were fooled, but I'm proud to say that we didn't get lost 
hiking back out to the car. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>