<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PRINCETON, N.J. _ ``Rapido, escoge un color,'' Diana Alfaro told a 
pupil. Quickly, pick a color. ``Morado,'' the boy responded. Purple. 
Five other second-graders holding up rectangles of different colors 
quickly picked out purple. ``Muy bien,'' Mrs. Alfaro told them with 
a big smile. ``Excelente.'' Still speaking in Spanish, Mrs. Alfaro 
asked a girl sitting on the floor for her name. ``Rojo,'' the girl 
answered incorrectly. Red. After being asked again, the girl finally 
answered, ``Yo me llamo Natalie.'' So it went, in another rapid-fire 
Spanish lesson at Johnson Elementary School, where second-graders 
take 15 minutes of Spanish instruction every day and Senora, as all 
the pupils call Mrs. Alfaro, speaks nary a word of English. The program 
at the school, part of the Princeton Regional District, was created 
to help comply with 1996 state curriculum guidelines that require 
foreign language instruction at the elementary level. Within a few 
years, officials at the school plan to offer Spanish to children as 
young as kindergarten age. Such efforts by Princeton Regional, and 
by other districts around the state, are being made as New Jersey 
joins a small core of states that are raising the premium on younger 
students' learning a second language. But while the half-dozen other 
states have requirements for foreign languages in elementary schools, 
according to the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages, 
only New Jersey is requiring elementary students to pass a proficiency 
test. ``We're placing a high value on learning another language,'' 
said Jay Doolan, the director of standards and professional development 
with the New Jersey Department of Education. ``We feel it's not only 
appropriate for competing in a shrinking world, but that learning 
another language also helps you do better in your first language.'' 
Educators who back the growing national movement of beginning foreign 
language instruction at an early age say, like a mantra, that brain 
research has shown that at about age 10, the window of opportunity 
closes for learning another language well. Doolan said research has 
shown that the study of a foreign language enhances memorization and 
listening skills, and that students who speak another language go 
on to score higher on the SAT. ``It gives children a sense of personal 
satisfaction to communicate with someone else in another language,'' 
he said. Every school district in New Jersey will get to pick which 
language, or languages, it will offer _ including American Sign Language 
_ and at which grade the school wants to begin. But starting in the 
2001-2002 academic year, all fourth-graders in the state will have 
to pass a proficiency test in that language, under the state's new 
curriculum standards. Doolan said state officials do not know how 
many districts, like Princeton, have already begun putting their foreign 
language program in place in the elementary schools. Among those that 
already have a program, there is much variation in terms of how long 
the language lessons are, how frequently they are offered and the 
level of training of teachers who are instructing in another language. 
But local school officials seemed to be united in their complaints 
about the cost of the foreign language programs. They do not receive 
any extra money from the state. They are also frustrated by the demands 
that the new guidelines are placing on their schedules, which are 
already crowded with other mandated subjects. State officials suggest 
that districts use regular classroom teachers, perhaps with the help 
of technology like the Internet, to teach foreign languages. ``It 
definitely is cutting edge,'' said Nancy Rhodes, director of foreign 
language education for the Center for Applied Linguistics in Washington. 
``It makes sense to have an assessment to show proficiency. A lot 
of people are very excited about what New Jersey is attempting to 
do.'' Fran Hoch, who is in charge of foreign language instruction 
for the North Carolina Department of Education, which is seen as a 
model for many other states, said her state failed in not including 
a testing requirement in its legislation. Consequently, she said, 
many districts have simply not complied with the state requirement 
that all schools offer foreign language instruction in kindergarten 
through fifth grade. Only 40 percent to 50 percent of the state's 
elementary school students take a foreign language. David Edwards, 
executive director of the Joint National Committee for Languages, 
a lobbying group in Washington, said New Jersey is responding to what 
parents across the nation seem to be demanding of public schools. 
``A significant amount of the push for foreign languages in elementary 
school is coming from parents, who want good jobs and good futures 
for their children,'' he said. A check with about a dozen of New Jersey's 
600 school districts shows there is wide variation in how they will 
comply with the requirements. In Woodcliff Lake in Bergen County, 
for example, the school district of 814 students offers an exploratory 
foreign language program for third-graders during the last trimester 
of the year, and then a full-year program beginning in the fourth 
grade, when children study a language for 25 minutes three times a 
week. This arrangement has been in place for several years, and there 
are no plans to offer foreign languages at the lower grades, said 
Elliot Solomon, the superintendent. ``We fully expect that our children 
will be successful on the test,'' he said. In those districts that 
have decided to expand their offerings to younger children, the financial 
and staffing consequences have been immense. In the Montclair Public 
School District in Essex County, for example, the decision to provide 
foreign languages to all of the districts' first- and second-graders 
has diminished the program of one of its schools, which has been offering 
foreign language to children as young as preschool for 15 years. The 
school, Nishuane Elementary School, has long prided itself on providing 
foreign language instruction four times a week as a centerpiece of 
its magnet school philosophy, but now it will be able to offer French 
and Spanish lessons only twice a week for some students because two 
language teachers will have to divide their time among more schools 
in the district as the program is expanded to include all first- and 
second-graders. School officials say they know the program will be 
valuable only if they continue the instruction for each child throughout 
the child's schooling. Those districts that want to offer more than 
one choice in foreign language are realizing they will need a dizzying 
strategy to accommodate the choices. In Teaneck, Janice Dowd, the 
instruction leader for foreign languages, said that in putting an 
elementary school foreign language program in place, school officials 
feared that by offering only Spanish, they would cause the French 
program now offered at the high school level to eventually die out. 
To accommodate both languages, they will offer Spanish to first-graders 
and French to second-graders. In the third through fifth grades, students 
will take both languages, alternating by 10-week grading periods. 
The school hopes to add Latin and Italian in the sixth grade, and 
by the seventh grade, they will allow students to pick one language 
to study in depth. In the Princeton schools, the plan is to eventually 
offer Spanish to all students from kindergarten through fifth grade. 
By the time students are in middle and high school, the foreign language 
classes will involve more sophisticated topics, like the study of 
another culture's literature, said Martin Smith, director of foreign 
language instruction. This year they are offering Spanish only to 
second- and fifth-graders. In Julie Rice's second-grade classroom, 
most of the students eagerly raised their hands to answer all of Mrs. 
Alfaro's questions during her short Spanish class. ``I like learning 
a second language,'' said Ilana Sigal, who is 8. ``I like just knowing 
that if somebody knows Spanish, I can talk to them.'' The teacher 
said she appreciates the students' enthusiasm. ``This is the perfect 
age to learn another language,'' said Mrs. Alfaro, who was recruited 
by the school especially for the program. ``They're not afraid of 
anything new. They listen. If you wait until they're in high school, 
they're too busy thinking about boyfriends and girlfriends, or they 
think, `Oh, I'm going to make a mistake and look stupid.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>