<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0107 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gary Thomas Rowe Jr., 64, a controversial FBI informer who infiltrated 
the Ku Klux Klan during the civil rights struggles of the 1960s, died 
of a heart attack four months ago in Savannah, Ga. He was buried under 
the name of Thomas Neal Moore, the identity that federal authorities 
helped him to assume in 1965 after he testified against fellow klansmen 
who were accused of killing Viola Gregg Liuzzo, a civil rights volunteer. 
Rowe's death became known last week when a television crew shooting 
footage for a program about the FBI and the Ku Klux Klan searched 
for Rowe in Savannah, only to learn that he had died May 25. Eugene 
Brooks, who had been Rowe's lawyer, confirmed the death. Brooks said 
Rowe had settled in Savannah, his home town, under the federal witness 
protection program. The lawyer said Rowe had worked for a private 
security company but died bankrupt. Rowe had long been divorced, the 
lawyer said, and left five children, whose names were not released 
``for obvious reasons.'' As an informer and a trial witness, Rowe 
provided information that led to the conviction of three klansmen 
for the Liuzzo killing. But for the next 18 years, he remained a figure 
of recurring controversy, accused of, and at times admitting to, planning 
and participating in the violence he was reporting to the FBI. In 
1975, wearing a bizarre cotton hood that resembled a Klan headpiece 
without the point, he told a Senate committee that the FBI had known 
of and condoned his participation in violence against black people 
and had ordered him to sow dissent within the Klan by having sexual 
relations with the wives of Klan members. He admitted to taking part 
in a brutal baseball bat assault on Freedom Riders in Birmingham in 
1961 and told Alabama police that he had fatally shot a black man, 
never identified, in a riot in 1963 and that federal authorities knew 
about these incidents. As late as 1983, Mrs. Liuzzo's children brought 
an unsuccessful $2 million suit against the FBI, charging that through 
its negligence in recruiting, training and controlling Rowe, it bore 
responsibility for the killing. As Rowe made his often boastful disclosures, 
figures inside and outside government debated the proper use of informers; 
some demanded greater oversight and others contended that good intelligence 
could not be obtained if infiltrators had to act like angels or Boy 
Scouts. David Garrow, a historian of the civil rights period, learned 
of Rowe's death from the television crew when it interviewed him for 
the program. He passed the information on to The New York Times. Rowe's 
story raised three sets of questions, he told The Times in an interview. 
``The first was to what extent did Rowe like to behave like a thug 
irrespective of who he was working for? Then there was the question 
of how much did he or did he not tell the FBI, and then, after he 
went public as an informer, how much did klansmen and their sympathizers 
try to offload every unsolved Klan crime on his shoulders?'' Rowe's 
name first appeared in public after the killing of Mrs. Liuzzo, a 
39-year-old wife of a Detroit teamsters official and mother of four, 
who had come to Alabama to help in the Selma-to-Montgomery civil rights 
march in the spring of 1965. On March 25, the day after the procession, 
as she drove a young black volunteer home, her car was overtaken and 
she was shot to death on a desolate stretch of road. The next day, 
President Lyndon B. Johnson declared war on the Ku Klux Klan in a 
dramatic address to the nation and named Rowe as one of four klansmen 
who had been arrested by the FBI in the shooting. The president promised 
to bring the Klan ``under the effective control of law'' and urged 
Congress to investigate the ``hooded society of bigots.'' The arrest 
of the four suspects within 12 hours of the crime suggested that the 
FBI had inside sources, and when Rowe was the only one of the four 
not indicted, he stood revealed as the informer. In his autobiography, 
``My Undercover Years With the Ku Klux Klan,'' published in 1976 by 
Bantam, Rowe wrote that an FBI agent named Barnett Kemp urged him 
to join the Ku Klux Klan in 1960 and report on its activities. He 
became a member of the Klan's Eastview 13 Klavern. FBI records show 
that he received $20 to $300 a month from the bureau and earned a 
total of $12,000 from 1960 to 1965. The book became the basis for 
a television movie in which Rowe was played by Don Meredith, the former 
football player. In 1965, Rowe testified in three trials that he had 
been with the three accused men when they followed and overtook Mrs. 
Liuzzo's car. When the others fired at her, he said, he pretended 
to shoot. Despite his testimony and ballistics evidence linking the 
fatal bullet to a weapon taken from a defendant, the first trial on 
murder charges in an Alabama court in Lowndes County ended in a hung 
jury. The second ended in acquittal. The third trial, in December, 
was a federal civil rights case based on an 1870 law. The three defendants 
were found guilty, each receiving the maximum penalty of 10 years 
in prison. Afterward Rowe vanished into the federal witness protection 
program, presumably becoming Thomas Moore. Then in 1975 he emerged, 
masked in his hood, as a witness before the Senate Select Committee 
on Intelligence. He said that in 1961 he had given the FBI advance 
warning of an attack in which he and other klansmen participated, 
beating Freedom Riders with baseball bats, chains and pistols at the 
Birmingham bus station. He said the klansmen had been promised 15 
minutes of free rein by Birmingham police and that he had advised 
his FBI contacts of this three weeks in advance. He added that when 
he asked his FBI contacts after the attack why nothing had been done, 
he said he was told: ``Who were we going to report it to? The Police 
Department was involved.'' He also testified that the FBI had told 
him to cause dissension in the Klan. ``I was told to sleep with as 
many wives as I could, to break up marriages,'' he said. In 1978, 
two sets of merging developments brought Rowe back into the news, 
even though he still hid behind his assumed identity. The first development 
involved a series of civil actions brought by the Liuzzo children 
and by several former Freedom Riders who had been injured in the Birmingham 
attack. They essentially charged the FBI with negligence and failure 
to protect the civil rights workers. The second development was a 
series of accusations by Alabama investigators relying on former klansmen. 
Rowe was indicted in 1978 on murder charges for having shot Mrs. Liuzzo, 
on the basis of evidence offered by the men he had helped convict 
in the federal case 13 years before. Attempts to extradite Rowe were 
blocked, and other efforts by Alabama to prosecute Rowe were rejected 
by a federal judge who ruled that the prosecution was based on highly 
prejudiced evidence. Earlier Alabama investigators had revealed that 
they suspected Rowe of involvement in the 1963 bombing attack on the 
East 16th Street Baptist Church in which four young girls were killed. 
In 1980 the Justice Department compiled a 302-page report on accusations 
involving Rowe and concluded that the FBI agents knew about and apparently 
covered up his participation in nonfatal attacks on blacks. But it 
said there was no evidence in FBI files to support accusations that 
Rowe had years earlier failed lie detector examinations in which he 
had denied knowledge of the church bombing. Robert Chambliss, who 
in 1977 was convicted of the church bombing, had been Rowe's superior 
in the Eastview 13 Klavern. In the 1983 negligence suit filed against 
the FBI by Mrs. Liuzzo's children, Dean Robb, the family's lawyer, 
said that when Rowe was in the Klan and working for the FBI, he ``was 
a hostile, violent, pugilistic unguided missile, a violence junkie.'' 
Judge Charles Joiner, a federal judge in Mrs. Liuzzo's home state 
of Michigan, ruled that no negligence had been proved. He even credited 
Rowe's prompt reporting of the murder with the eventual conviction 
of his companions. In another case in 1983, however, Judge Charles 
Stewart Jr. of U.S. District Court in Manhattan ordered the government 
to pay $25,000 to James Peck, one of the Freedom Riders who had been 
badly beaten in Birmingham. Alex Zipperer, a lawyer who had represented 
Rowe in the past, said several people in Savannah knew about his role 
a Klan informer. Zipperer said that Rowe would often talk about his 
life in the '60s and ``was quite bitter about the FBI, feeling it 
had disowned him.'' In his autobiography Rowe portrayed himself as 
a man eager to help the FBI in its struggle against the Klan. He said 
he preferred to call himself an ``undercover man,'' rather than an 
``informer.'' Near the end of the book, he said: ``While my ghost 
was writing the story, an editor remarked that it would make a good 
book if I `could demonstrate a complete change of opinion and become 
a civil rights advocate.' Maybe so but I prefer to let the facts speak 
for themselves.'' Although he thought black people should be treated 
fairly, he added, he did not approve of ``integrating schools or churches 
or neighborhoods or interracial marriage.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>