<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
His departure would be a disaster in every way. From the standpoint 
of performance, it would cost the rejuvenated Boston Red Sox their 
best hitter for average and power. From the standpoint of morale, 
it would remove one of the team's most respected and authoritative 
voices from the clubhouse. And from the standpoint of public relations, 
it would infuriate the fans and take away the most beloved black superstar 
baseball player this city _ one long regarded as racially hostile 
toward African-Americans _ has had. Yet, the feeling here in Boston 
is that Mo Vaughn, a free agent after this season, may have played 
one of his last games for the Red Sox in Saturday's 4-3 defeat to 
the Cleveland Indians in the American League division series. The 
most pessimistic observers point to General Manager Dan Duquette's 
glaring omission of Vaughn during a spiel about Red Sox players who 
would compete in the 1999 All-Star Game at Fenway Park. At a July 
news conference announcing that the annual classic would be played 
in Boston next year, Duquette spoke about the joy it would bring the 
city to see Red Sox such as pitchers Pedro Martinez and Tom Gordon 
and shortstop Nomar Garciaparra play before the home crowd. ``Uhh, 
didn't you forget somebody?'' the local media asked. Only then did 
Duquette mention Vaughn, a two-time All-Star with a career batting 
average of .304. Publicly, Duquette is saying that Vaughn will be 
around next year, pointing to his portrait in the team's 1999 schedule 
as evidence. But the relationship between Vaughn and the franchise 
is somewhat strained, partially because of two drunken driving incidents 
that plagued the first baseman in the past year and a half. Vaughn 
and the Red Sox almost came to terms before the season began, but 
when the club traded for Martinez and then signed him to a six-year, 
$75 million deal, they no longer had the money to immediately take 
care of Vaughn. Since then, Vaughn has said he wants to test the free-agent 
market, a statement that frightens Boston fans who remember longtime 
Red Sox hero Roger Clemens mouthing the same words before signing 
with the Toronto Blue Jays a couple of years ago. Last Monday in Cleveland, 
Vaughn was asked if the Red Sox performance in their division series 
against the Indians would affect his decision to test his market value. 
``I don't even know,'' he said. ``We'll talk about that when it's 
time. I haven't even really thought about leaving at this point. I'm 
just trying to go out with the attitude to win.'' The uncertainty 
surrounding his future _ not to mention the 10-15 pounds he has lost 
_ has only strengthened his performance on the field. A seven-year 
veteran, Vaughn enjoyed his finest season to date, clubbing 40 homers, 
knocking in 115 runs and hitting a career-best .337 to finish second 
in the American League batting race. With numbers like that, Vaughn 
could wind up fielding offers in the $10 million range during the 
off-season. The question is, will one of those offers be made by the 
Red Sox? As for Cleveland, the most pressing issue facing the Indians 
this off-season will be finding a second baseman. Since trading fan 
favorite Carlos Baerga to the New York Mets in July 1996, the club 
has had more than a dozen players at the position, only to become 
dissatisfied with each one. Current starter Joey Cora, whom they acquired 
from Seattle in August, is the latest tryout in an undistinguished 
list that has included David Bell, Tony Fernandez, Shawon Dunston, 
Jeff Kent, Jose Vizcaino and Julio Franco. A free agent this summer, 
Cora is not likely to be re-signed. For the past two years, the Indians 
have fiddled with the idea of bringing in Baltimore's Roberto Alomar 
to play alongside his older brother Sandy, and talk of trading for 
the Orioles star will certainly resurface in the coming months. While 
the club's starting rotation is not among the league's elite, it could 
be in the near future. So do not be surprised if the Indians don't 
attempt to deal for an ace. Flame throwers Jaret Wright, 22, and Bartolo 
Colon, 23, combined for 26 victories this season and should only get 
better, and Charles Nagy, Dwight Gooden and Dave Burba are solid, 
if not spectacular. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>