<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0044 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Congress is beginning to climb the impeachment tree. Each time the 
limbs divide, the politicians must decide, this way or that. Each 
decision will take them closer to one of the outermost branches: impeachment, 
resignation or some form of Congressional sanction. The first of the 
binary choices will be made this week when the House of Representatives 
votes on whether to launch a formal impeachment inquiry. No one doubts 
that an inquiry will be approved. But exactly what the House Judiciary 
Committee will investigate is another matter. When the Watergate investigations 
began, serious doubts existed about President Nixon's culpability. 
``What did the president know, and when did he know it?'' Senator 
Howard H. Baker Jr. kept asking. It took more than a year and required 
testimony from the president's top aides (though not the president 
himself) and Nixon's own tape-recorded comments in the Oval Office 
to answer that basic question. In the current scandal, the important 
facts are known, down to the shabbiest details. The testimony of the 
main witnesses, including President Clinton, is on the public record, 
having been taken by a grand jury and published by Congress. So will 
the Judiciary Committee hold public hearings? If so, who will be summoned 
to testify who can add to what is already clear? It is hard to imagine 
that the panel can have hearings without calling the principal witness, 
Monica Lewinsky. And it is even harder to imagine how Ms. Lewinsky 
could testify without frightfully embarrassing her questioners, the 
rest of Congress and much of the country. The committee will also 
have to decide whether to expand its investigations into other areas 
like the Whitewater real estate deal, campaign finance abuses and 
misuse of personnel records in the White House (with or without new 
information from the independent counsel, Kenneth Starr). The problem 
here for the Republicans is that other congressional committees have 
thoroughly plumbed those issues without striking pay dirt. Rather 
than re-gather the facts, the Judiciary Committee may confine itself 
to interpreting them. Here, there are two essential questions, one 
easy to answer and the other much harder. The easy question is whether 
Clinton lied under oath when he denied having a sexual relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky. Few if any lawmakers will take Clinton's side and 
say that what he did was not sex. They would risk being laughed out 
of office by their constituents. The much more difficult question 
is whether this warrants impeachment. Obviously, it is not in the 
same category as treason, bribery or rampant government corruption. 
On the other hand, perjury, even on private matters, is not an inconsequential 
breach of the American system. The way the Judiciary Committee answers 
may depend on who is sitting on the panel after the November election. 
Two members of the committee, Charles Schumer of New York, a Democrat, 
and Bob Inglis of South Carolina, a Republican, are running for the 
Senate and will not be in the House next year. Others may be defeated 
in the election or may seek assignment on committees with more overall 
authority, like Ways and Means or Appropriations. The ratio of Republicans 
to Democrats on the Judiciary Committee, now 21 to 16, is based loosely 
on the ratio in the whole House, and gains by one party or the other 
in the elections could alter the partisan balance. In any event, party 
leaders will probably have the chance to fill several slots, and the 
committee's vote to recommend impeachment or not could turn on whether 
the leaders pick firebrands or conciliators. If the committee does 
recommend impeachment, the matter will then go before the full House 
of Representatives, to be decided by the vote of a simple majority. 
Here too, the November elections could be the determining factor. 
The Republican edge now is only 21 seats, the smallest margin for 
the majority party in more than 40 years. If, as a result of the elections, 
the Republican margin is, say, doubled, the prospects of impeachment 
will be greater. If the Republicans cannot expand their majority, 
impeachment is much less likely. In 1974, the year of the Nixon impeachment 
inquiry, Democrats held a 50-seat majority in the House. President 
Nixon resigned before the full House could vote on the impeachment 
articles approved by the Judiciary Committee. If the House does vote 
to impeach Clinton, he would stand trial in the Senate. Conviction 
would require a two-thirds majority. If the vote in the House is essentially 
along party lines, conviction in the Senate seems out of the question, 
since Democratic senators would likely not break ranks. Republicans 
now hold 55 Senate seats. They could gain strength in the elections. 
But no one expects 67 Republicans in the next Senate. But if a sizable 
number of Democrats join in the House vote to impeach, the outcome 
in the Senate would become less predictable. Democratic senators would 
feel freer to vote to convict. Supposedly, Clinton would sit in the 
well of the Senate. Members of the House would serve as prosecutors. 
Chief Justice William Rehnquist would preside. No one can quite fathom 
what it would be like. There is no modern precedent. The only other 
time a president has been tried on impeachment charges was in 1868, 
when the Senate fell one vote shy of convicting Andrew Johnson, who 
boycotted the proceedings. Of course, at each juncture, lawmakers 
could choose not to move on to the next branch toward impeachment. 
One possibility is that Clinton will resign, though that seems unlikely 
as long as his approval rating in the polls remains so high. Many 
political scholars, even some who would like to see Clinton impeached, 
believe resignation would be a serious mistake. It would leave unanswered 
the question of whether a president should be removed from office 
for an offense that did not involve a matter of state. And since it 
would bypass the Constitutional procedures for removing the president 
from office, it would, some say, disenfranchise the voters who had 
no illusions that he led the personal life of a saint when they elected 
him twice. The other possibility is that Congress will allow the president 
to stay in office but vote to censure or otherwise sanction him. This 
is the course the White House is pursuing, realizing that Clinton 
has no chance of getting off scot-free. But a public rebuke with no 
further consequences seems insufficient to many lawmakers, including 
some who would like Clinton to remain in office. And many authorities 
believe that under the Constitution, Congress cannot fine the president 
or sanction him in any other way that would bite short of removing 
him from office (although the president could presumably agree to 
a fine or some other punishment in what would amount to a plea bargain). 
And there is another problem with a censure. If Democrats regained 
control of Congress, they could always reverse the sanction. That 
happened once before. In 1834, the Senate voted to censure President 
Andrew Jackson. Three years later, politics had changed, and the censure 
was rescinded. Whatever happens, it seems likely to take a while. 
Many Americans, the opinion polls show, are sick of this scandal and 
would like it just to go away. But Congress is already out on a limb. 
As unpleasant as the choices may seem, just going away is not an alternative. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>