<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two by two, a procession of boys in heavy pullovers, or lopils, and 
girls in embroidered huipil blouses dance a jaunty dance, their hands 
clasped behind their backs, to the tunes of a marimba band. They make 
their way up the stairs of a stage at the front of the room, where, 
finally, a nervous-looking young girl at the end of the procession 
ascends in the puffy white dress that is the traditional clothing 
of a Mayan bride and is crowned the year's Queen of San Miguel. The 
occasion on this recent Saturday night at Our Lady Queen of Angels 
Church in the historic center of downtown Los Angeles is the Fiesta 
de San Miguel, honoring the patron saint of the Mayan village of San 
Miguel Acatan. The 100 families taking part in the festival immigrated 
to the United States from San Miguel Acatan but are afraid to return 
in the aftermath of Guatemala's civil war, or simply do not want to 
go back. But under a 1997 law, the Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central 
American Relief Act, signed into law by President Clinton in November 
of 1997, many of the Mayans here and elsewhere in Southern California 
will eventually face interviews that will determine whether they can 
stay in the country and apply for permanent residency or be told to 
return to their homeland. A little-known language gap _ most Mayans 
have a limited command of Spanish _ stands to make that process difficult 
at best, so the festival opens with a reminder from a speaker that 
the interviews are coming and that a new group of indigenous interpreters 
is available to help give those seeking residency a fighting chance. 
About 50,000 Mayans were among 250,000 Central Americans who fled 
torture, rape and murder in the 1980s during a civil war in their 
native Guatemala, and some 20,000 have settled in the Pico-Union and 
South Central neighborhoods of Los Angeles and in other Southern California 
communities, working in sewing factories, picking produce in the fields 
or lingering on the streets in the early morning in the hopes of being 
picked up for a day of manual labor. Guatemala's war formally ended 
in 1996, but many Mayans are afraid to return to a country still in 
turmoil or have come to feel at home in the United States. Although 
some people have already gone through the asylum process, immigrant 
rights advocates have been feeling a sense of urgency regarding the 
others because the interviews under the 1997 law were to begin this 
month (they have been delayed). To help the Mayans stay here, the 
advocates must first help them overcome a language barrier: Mayans 
speak indigenous Indian languages and know only basic Spanish, not 
enough to represent themselves adequately in immigration hearings. 
(The INS does not routinely provide interpretation services outside 
the world's major languages.) The misconception that Mayans speak 
fluent Spanish is frequently furthered by Mayans themselves. They 
often go into the proceedings without a lawyer or an indigenous interpreter, 
in part because they do not know they can request one and in part 
because they do not want to attract attention to their indigenous 
heritage, which can be a target for condescension from Latino peers 
who ridicule them for being ``Indios'' or ``ignorant.'' As a result, 
advocates say, Mayans lose the vast majority of their immigration 
cases. ``Most people don't know what the judge says, what the interpreter 
says, because the interpretation is English to Spanish, and people 
don't know what many of the words mean,'' said Victor Lopez, the director 
of Maya Various Interpretations Services and Indigenous Organization 
Network, or Mayavision, that was recently formed to provide interpreters 
for the Mayans. Lopez came to this country in 1981 from Guatemala 
and started out as a flower picker in San Diego County, but began 
providing interpretation services for his countrymen 14 years ago. 
The network, which is financed by private grants, officially began 
operation in August and has about 35 interpreters. Typical of the 
immigrants that the network seeks to help is Rosario Lucas, the wife 
of a landscaper in San Diego County, who crossed the border illegally 
in 1994 to flee the constant fear of Guatemalan guerrillas and join 
her husband, who had fled earlier. She began working on her asylum 
application in 1997. Ms. Lucas struggled through the process in Spanish 
for a year before finding an interpreter for her native Q'anjob'al, 
understanding the general sense of things but unable to follow the 
legal complexities of her case. ``I'm feeling real happy, because 
somebody's coming to help me in my language,'' Ms. Lucas said. ``I 
can understand him and I can explain my case to him. If he understands 
me, and he can tell everything I'm saying to the judge, I can answer 
all the questions the judge is going to ask me.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>