<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some people might find it vaguely unsettling, perhaps even blasphemous. 
They wouldn't even consider living in a building that used to be a 
church, as if God might be looking down at them, watching and judging 
as they engage in their very human and earthly pursuits. But to Thomas 
Head, a medieval-history scholar who was moving to New York to take 
a teaching position at Hunter College, making his home in a former 
church seemed perfectly natural. For nearly two decades his intellectual 
life has centered on saints and their artifacts, on the history of 
religion. What could be more appropriate than placing his big wooden 
desk beneath a huge arched stained-glass window that used to shed 
light on the faithful when the building was Spencer Memorial Church? 
A number of churches in New York have been turned into apartments, 
and in most cases there are few external signs signifying their transformation. 
The shells are left intact. Sometimes the only clue to their new use 
is the lack of parishioners filing in and out on Sundays. This particular 
church, a Gothic Revival structure of granite stonework at the corner 
of Clinton and Remsen streets in Brooklyn Heights, was built in 1851 
by a group of abolitionists who broke away from the existing Presbyterian 
church to create their own, and made it a stop on the Underground 
Railroad that helped black slaves escape to freedom in the North. 
By the 1970s, the Presbyterian congregation was dwindling, and the 
building was no longer needed. It was saved from demolition by its 
inclusion in the area's historic district, and in the late 1970s it 
was bought by two brothers, Jean and Joe Miele, an architect and an 
engineer, for $165,000. They sent the pews to Columbia University 
and divided the space into 10 apartments, including duplexes and triplexes, 
plus storage space in the attic where the slaves used to sleep. Head 
saw the apartment in the church on a ``reconnaissance trip'' to New 
York in late March, shortly after he decided to take the position 
at Hunter, drawn by the chance to teach graduate students again, as 
he had at Yale, and to make contact with other medievalists, who he 
said were scarce in St. Louis, where he was a professor at Washington 
University. Being in New York would also put him closer to his mother 
in Rhode Island, where he grew up. For five days, he stayed in Brooklyn 
Heights with some friends from Harvard, where he had been both an 
undergraduate and graduate student. ``A couple of things became clear,'' 
he said. ``Stuff on the market went incredibly quickly. And with mortgages 
what they were, I did all the math and decided it made sense for me 
to buy.'' In five days, he saw 35 places, many of them in Chelsea, 
the Upper West Side and the lower East 30s, three areas he had decided 
made sense for him. But as he returned each night to his friends' 
apartment in Brooklyn Heights, he found the neighborhood appealing. 
So when Elizabeth Celano, a broker at William B. May Co., asked him 
if he wanted to see the duplex in the church, he was interested. ``When 
I walked in, I loved the place,'' he said, which isn't hard to understand. 
The first floor of the duplex apartment is open, like a loft, with 
only the galley kitchen in the middle, and a combination laundry and 
bathroom, closed off. Upstairs is a library area, an office, and a 
bedroom and bath. It is light, airy, and high-ceilinged, with huge 
floral-patterned stained-glass windows on the second floor, in green, 
blue, lavender and white. They are the only reminder of the building's 
original use. Mr. Head was also interested in a loft on 23rd Street 
in Chelsea, a neighborhood that seemed quintessentially urban. ``It 
was what I envisioned a New York place would be like,'' he said, whereas 
Brooklyn Heights felt urban in a more familiar way, like Cambridge, 
Mass., or the Back Bay section of Boston. Two days after returning 
to St. Louis, he made a full-price bid of $349,000 for the duplex 
in the church. He liked the stained-glass windows, and, more practically, 
it was several hundred square feet larger than the Chelsea loft, providing 
more space for his hundreds of books, books like ``The Harvest of 
Hellenism,'' ``Introduction to the New Testament'' and ``Medieval 
Scandinavia: An Encyclopedia.'' For someone who had never owned a 
co-op, the process of closing and approval, including a lengthy interview 
with the board, was somewhat mystifying. ``Everyone was friendly,'' 
he said. They asked questions about his hobbies (probably trying to 
find out if he was a player of loud music), the source of his money 
and even his plans for taking care of his mother. ``Basically, they 
were saying, `Prove to us that you're not going to be bankrupt,' '' 
he said. ``I'm only a college professor, after all.'' After he closed, 
he had the hardwood floors sanded and the walls painted in colors 
like Wedgwood blue and a rich salmon. He has hung his eclectic collection 
of art, including a piece by an elderly Aboriginal woman that he bought 
on a trip to Australia and some manuscript pages from the 13th century. 
Furniture he inherited from his great aunt, such as a cedar chest 
that became locked in the move and happens to be keyless, and a regal 
chair upholstered in red velvet, easily cohabit with rugs from Morocco 
and a carved wooden couch he bought in New Mexico. He moved in on 
a Thursday and by the next Tuesday was up at Hunter teaching a course 
on the early Middle Ages. The commute to Hunter has turned out to 
be quick enough, especially now that he has learned to switch to the 
local on the same platform at Grand Central. ``I was changing at 59th 
Street and walking up and down those long stairs,'' he said. ``This 
is called, `Tom learns about New York.' '' He remembered how a stint 
in Paris taught him that knowing the subway system is more important 
than knowing actual distances. Life in a former church has turned 
out to be pretty similar to life anywhere, although there are the 
random doorbell ringers who cannot find the doctors' offices below. 
The signage and doorbells are so subtle that most passersby would 
probably assume the church is still used by a congregation. Raised 
as a Roman Catholic, he is not impervious to the emotional power of 
the building's history. He especially feels it in his study, working 
at his computer beneath the stained-glass window, having it light 
the room where he engages in late-20th-century pursuits, such as updating 
the Web site he keeps _ www.artsci.wustl.edu _ where surfers can learn 
about saints and their artifacts, and his students can get information 
about his courses. The building's transformation, he said, is not 
unlike the process that drives his life in history, trying to get 
a contemporary perspective on the past. ``That combination of old 
and new,'' he said, ``is what being a historian is about.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>