<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0042 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Could it be that the latest images of slaughtered ethnic Albanians 
from Kosovo _ slashed abdomens, spilled brains, slit throats, severed 
limbs _ comfort the West in a deeply held notion of incorrigible Balkan 
violence even as they spur renewed talk of NATO air strikes against 
the Serbs? The question is a terrible one. But after a decade of killing 
set in motion by the rise to power in 1987 of the Serbian leader Slobodan 
Milosevic, it seems it must be posed. The cycle of butchery, professed 
Western outrage, threats, subsequent obfuscation and disaster has 
been too repetitive to ignore. In the jumbled images of pointed Ottoman 
staves topped with Christian heads, ax-wielding executioners of Fascist-era 
Croatia, bearded Serbian ``Chetniks'' with murderous grins and other 
ghoulish images of ``ancient Balkan tribal rivalries,'' the West has 
often found justification for its stance. It has been a bloody century 
in the Balkans. Only a fool would deny that. From 1912 until today, 
five wars have been fought, if the ongoing wars of Yugoslavia's destruction 
are regarded as a single conflict (otherwise, including Kosovo, the 
wars number eight). More than two million people have been killed. 
But perhaps lazy thinking about the consistency of Milosevic's destructive 
policies, twisted memories, contorted history and Western cynicism 
have contributed more decisively to the bloodshed than any fabled 
Balkan predisposition to kill and to mutilate. One of the more unforgettable 
gestures of the latest Balkan conflicts was the nonchalant wave of 
the hand of Gen. Sir Michael Rose, the commander of United Nations 
forces in Bosnia in 1994, that always accompanied his dismissive mantra: 
``This is the Balkans, you know.'' The phrase, a new rendering of 
Otto von Bismarck's laconic ``The Balkans are not worth the healthy 
bones of a Pomeranian grenadier,'' amounted to a form of renunciation. 
In it was captured a widespread, often subliminal, view that if the 
people in the Balkans are really intent on killing each other, there 
is not much to be done about it. Last week, adopting the well-honed 
genre, Michael McCurry, the White House spokesman, responded to the 
mutilation in Kosovo by saying, ``These atrocities are part and parcel 
of the horror that has been under way in the Balkans for years.'' 
He did not try to quantify the years. But in June 1995, speaking of 
the Bosnian war, Bill Clinton did. ``Their enmities,'' he said, ``go 
back 500 years, some would say almost a thousand years.'' Quick arithmetic 
yielded the astonishing fact that, for the president, there had been 
an uninterrupted stream of Balkan bloodshed since 995. Of course, 
that was not the case. But a violence so constant would be a fact 
of life so entrenched that no reasonable person would attempt to put 
an end to it. Therein lay the essence of the president's message. 
Another message was not lost on the people of Sarajevo. While disguised 
as history, the premise of such comments was an ineluctable ``Balkan 
savagery.'' Savagery, as we all know, is the work of savages. But 
the entirely predictable course of the Balkan conflict _ from the 
Kosovo of the late 1980s where Milosevic whipped the Serbs into a 
delirium of nationalist indignation to the latest deadly spasms of 
that delirium in Kosovo today _ raises an important question. If cool 
analysis, rather than what has often looked like unspoken prejudice, 
had guided Western policy, might not many lives have been saved? For 
Kosovo, whose population is more than 90 percent ethnic Albanian, 
always held the key to the decade-long violence that has now come 
full circle in the Balkans, and the key to Milosevic's destructive 
psyche. There was nothing ancient about the start of Yugoslavia's 
violent unraveling. In 1986, the Serbian Memorandum, the nationalist 
diatribe that was the basis of Milosevic's rise to power, spoke of 
the ``neo-Fascist aggression'' of the Kosovo Albanians, their ``reign 
of terror,'' their attack on ``the cradle of the Serbs' historical 
existence,'' and their ``physical, political, legal and cultural genocide 
of the Serbian population in Kosovo.'' In fact, through the 1980s, 
no more than a handful of Serbs died in violent incidents in Kosovo. 
There was nothing that could justify this incendiary language. Its 
thrust, however, served Milosevic's unwavering purpose: to couch an 
aggressive Serbian project in defensive terms. For imagined war, imagined 
genocide that the majority of a nation becomes convinced is real may 
in time come to inspire real war, real genocide. So it proved in Bosnia, 
during the Serb rampage of 1992, and so it seems today in devastated 
Kosovo villages like Donji Obrinje. Indeed, throughout the wars of 
Yugoslavia's destruction, ``genocide'' has been the most overused 
word in the Serbian vocabulary, a free pass allowing the eternal Serb 
victim to kill with an obstinate blindness. In 1993, responding to 
international trade sanctions on Serbia, Milosevic asked with what 
right Western countries had ``turned 12 million inhabitants of Europe 
into a test site for the application of what is, I hope, the last 
genocide of this century.'' In the same year, Biljana Plavsic, the 
deputy leader of the Bosnian Serbs and later a most unlikely standard-bearer 
of the Dayton peace agreement, accused Bosnia's Muslims a of pursuing 
a form of ``sexual terror'' against the Serbs that was ``genocidal 
in character.'' This phrase (Ms. Plavsic justified it by referring 
to the Islamic practice of polygamy and to the ``right to the first 
night'' she said was enjoyed by Muslim notables with Christian women 
under the Ottoman Turks) recalled the accusations of ``demographic 
genocide'' long leveled in Belgrade against the Kosovo Albanians. 
The purpose of such language was always clear enough: to use the high 
birth rate of the Kosovo Albanians and, to a lesser extent, the Bosnian 
Muslims to summon forth every stereotype of the lusting Turk. In the 
same way, if with more justification, Milosevic's propaganda machine 
relentlessly used images from the real Croatian genocide against the 
Serbs during World War II to portray every contemporary Croat as a 
latter-day Fascist ready to throw Serbs into a concentration camp. 
Milosevic has had a consistent purpose: to use the darkest Balkan 
ghosts to inspire the fear (and fear's other face, crazed violence) 
on which he has thrived. Western governments have seemed ready to 
play a similar game as reason for throwing up their hands. As Clinton 
said in 1994, ``In this case, the truth is, people there keep killing 
each other.'' It is true that there is a particular intensity to slaughter 
in the Balkans, as the mutilated bodies in Kosovo underscore. The 
desire to eliminate all trace of ``the other'' in a land of long-shifting 
borders, the fratricidal aspect of much of the killing among the south 
Slavs, the frenzied attempts to draw ethnic lines through a reality 
of miscegenation, the old reflexes of a crusade against the infidel, 
the Ottoman habits of ostentatious execution to discourage new offenses, 
the intensifying cycles of myth and revenge as the Balkan gyre turns 
_ all this, no doubt, plays a part. But there is nothing inevitable 
about what is happening in the Balkans. It has its causes. They lie 
not in some faraway history, nor in some genetic readiness to kill. 
The issue today, as a decade ago, is the way Milosevic has cynically 
used the tragic 73-year history of Yugoslavia _ particularly the wave 
upon wave of intra-Yugoslav killing during World War II _ to revive 
terror and consolidate his power while unleashing new waves of destruction. 
He has been abetted, notably by President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, 
but his responsibility appears clear. Rather than confront this fact, 
with its uncomfortable corollary that peace in the Balkans depends 
on Milosevic being defeated, the West has repeatedly blurred responsibility: 
It invited Milosevic to the London peace conference of 1992 after 
the archipelago of Serb concentration camps in Bosnia had been uncovered; 
it opted for his extraordinary de facto rehabilitation in order to 
conclude the Dayton agreement in 1995, and finally it engaged him 
as an interlocutor on Kosovo. On Dec. 16, 1992, Lawrence Eagleburger, 
then secretary of state, talked of the ``political and command responsibility'' 
for crimes in Bosnia, and named Milosevic as a potential war criminal. 
There was no follow-up. Once again, in Kosovo, the readiness of Milosevic 
to resort to an extraordinarily heartless violence seems clear. Many 
in Western chancelleries would still be inclined to respond, ``This 
is the Balkans, you know.'' However, the fact remains that, through 
a decade of Balkan violence, the one Western act that demonstrably 
contributed to peace _ albeit the deeply flawed peace in Bosnia _ 
was the concerted NATO bombing of Serb positions in Bosnia in August 
and September 1995. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>