<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New York Giants safety Tito Wooten has had more to worry about of 
late than the possibility of losing his starting job because of poor 
play. Wooten, who has had a series of personal problems, has received 
at least one death threat within the past six weeks, according to 
high-ranking National Football League executives. The threat was taken 
so seriously by the Giants and NFL officials that extra security was 
provided for Wooten at a home game earlier this season and at Wooten's 
home. The Giants were told that someone was planning to kill Wooten 
either at Giants Stadium or his residence in New Jersey, said the 
executives, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The team then notified 
the league's security office. League officials say they believe the 
threat may have come from a friend or family member of a woman with 
whom Wooten previously had a relationship. The Giants would not comment, 
and NFL officials told Wooten not to discuss the matter. During his 
college and professional years, Wooten has had a series of troubled 
relationships with women. He has been arrested three times on charges 
relating to domestic violence, but in all three cases, the women declined 
to seek prosecution. The most recent case occurred last December and 
involved his girlfriend Akina Wilson. She eventually dropped charges 
that Wooten had choked and beaten her. In January, she committed suicide. 
It is not rare for an NFL player to receive threats. There have even 
been cases in which gamblers phoned in fake threats to a key player, 
such as a quarterback, to try to distract him into having a bad game, 
the league executives said. But the league and the Giants considered 
the threat against Wooten more serious. There was extra security in 
Giants Stadium for Wooten at a home game earlier this season _ the 
officials would not say which one. The league also arranged security 
for the fifth-year safety at his home after the game. The NFL spoke 
to law enforcement officials, who proceeded to investigate the threat. 
It was determined by both the authorities and the NFL that Wooten 
was in no immediate danger, and the extra security lasted for only 
one game. Wooten has been having problems on the field as well recently. 
He has consistently blown coverages and been beaten deep by opposing 
wide receivers. Officially, he missed last week's game against San 
Diego with a sore hamstring. Privately, coaches and players say Wooten 
was benched because of his poor play. Many of Wooten's teammates think 
his backup, Percy Ellsworth, is a smarter, better player. Ellsworth 
had two interceptions against the Chargers last Sunday. If he continues 
to play well, he could be in the starting lineup permanently. nn 
</TEXT>
</DOC>