<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0050 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last month, British Airways began issuing printed warnings to abusive 
passengers, giving notice that continued misbehavior could result 
in hefty fines and even jail sentences. The handouts, which British 
reporters immediately dubbed ``yellow cards'' after the warnings soccer 
players receive from referees prior to being ejected from a game, 
are the latest development in a two-year campaign by the airline industry 
to clamp down on passengers who assault gate agents, flight attendants 
and even pilots. Newspapers and television stations around the world 
have featured scores of accounts of what appears to be an alarming 
increase in angry passengers who punch, kick, scratch, bite and head-butt 
airline workers or one another. Last month, an American Airlines flight 
from New York to Los Angeles made an unscheduled landing in Denver 
to unload a passenger who had become violent after a bodyguard asked 
him to stop bothering members of the rock band Hootie and the Blowfish. 
A few days earlier, a young British woman was sentenced to 15 months 
in prison for attacking three flight attendants on a British Airways 
flight from New York to London in June. The woman had just been denied 
entry into the United States and appeared to be drunk. When the crew 
declined to serve her, she became violent, biting a female flight 
attendant and crushing her leg with a food cart. After being placed 
in handcuffs, she head-butted two other flight attendants. The more 
dramatic examples of air rage have become modern legends. Perhaps 
the most famous case was that of a 58-year-old business executive 
from Greenwich, Conn., who got drunk on a United Airlines flight from 
Buenos Aires to New York in 1995 and defecated on a food cart. Many 
of the less-celebrated cases are even more disturbing, with assaulted 
flight crews requiring stitches and extensive counseling. ``Getting 
beat up is not like in the Westerns,'' said Capt. Ed Soliday, vice 
president of safety and security at United Airlines. ``People have 
a lot of mental trauma about that.'' Yet as deplorable as these incidents 
are, the question remains: Are airline passengers really getting more 
unruly? Several airlines and unions representing pilots and flight 
attendants are convinced they are. At their urging, the Federal Aviation 
Administration, the Justice Department and the FBI have stepped up 
efforts to prosecute aggressive passengers, resulting in heavier fines 
and some lengthy prison sentences. But on closer inspection the rise 
in air rage appears to be a lot like the famous crime wave in turn-of-century 
New York City started by the journalists Lincoln Steffens and Jacob 
Riis, who created a furor simply by reporting robberies and burglaries 
that their newspapers had previously ignored. Because the number of 
airline passengers is growing each year, it may not be surprising 
that the number of violent incidents is also rising. But by any standard 
they are still relatively rare. Airlines in the United States alone 
carried 600 million passengers last year. The FAA reported a total 
of 196 incidents in which passengers interfered with flight crews, 
which is a federal crime. That's one incident for every three million 
passengers. The agency is quick to say its records are incomplete. 
They include only incidents that result in fines and other civil penalties, 
not those referred to the authorities for criminal prosecution. Measuring 
air rage is further complicated by the fact that each airline has 
its own definition of what constitutes abusive behavior. But the total 
number of reported incidents is still small. United, the country's 
largest airline with 84 million passengers last year, says it had 
40 violent incidents from January through August, down from 62 during 
the comparable period last year. American, on the other hand, the 
second-largest carrier, said it had 921 incidents last year, a 200 
percent increase from 1994. But unlike United, American includes verbal 
as well as physical assaults in its statistics. Some widely accepted 
statistics are dubious. British Airways, for example, said its new 
policy was prompted by a 400 percent increase in air rage incidents 
around the world over the least three years. Iain Jack, the carrier's 
head of security, said the figure came from a presentation by an executive 
of Cathay Pacific Airways at a seminar in Malaysia in May. It was 
ultimately traced to an informal survey of a dozen airlines by an 
official of the International Federation of Air Line Pilots' Associations. 
There is also the question whether the airlines' concerted crackdown 
on passenger violence in the last two years has led to an increase 
in reported incidents. As part of their stepped-up campaigns, many 
airlines now encourage employees to report incidents, offering them 
legal advice and paid leave to testify in court. Before, staff were 
discouraged from filing complaints because the airlines were wary 
of offending customers. But many airlines changed their policies as 
a result of pressure from the unions and the companies' impression 
that the problem was growing. In addition, the FAA and the Justice 
Department have pushed for more arrests by the FBI and other federal 
agents. For example, 40 airport security personnel have been deputized 
as federal marshals in Detroit to enable them to make arrests. The 
intense interest of the news media has also helped attract the attention 
of prosecutors and, as in the days of Steffens and Riis, perhaps makes 
the problem appear more severe than it really is. ``This is not new 
by any means,'' said John Mazor, a spokesman for the Air Line Pilots 
Association. ``But it is only in the last two years that we have been 
able to attract the media attention and the attention of judges and 
prosecutors.'' Explanations for the alleged rise in air rage vary 
as widely as the numbers. Some say it is due to excessive on-board 
drinking; others say incidents occur when passengers are denied alcohol. 
The flight attendants' unions point to overcrowding and the unrealistic 
expectations of a stress-free experience raised by airline advertising. 
Some airlines point to the ``democratization'' of air travel, a euphemism 
for the rising number of poorer passengers drawn to air travel by 
bargain fares. But others say the inflated self-importance of well-heeled 
passengers is to blame for most of the violent incidents. Jack said 
70 percent of the reported incidents on British Airways were related 
to the airline's ban on smoking. But he acknowledged that the airline 
really doesn't know why some passengers become violent. It recently 
commissioned a psychology professor to study the problem. Statistics 
aside, union officials and airline executives insist that the anecdotal 
evidence of increased passenger misbehavior is overwhelming. Capt. 
Stephen Luckey, a pilot at Northwest Airlines who is also head of 
the Air Line Pilots Association's security committee, recalled a case 
last year in which a passenger walked down the aisle of a jumbo jet 
with his pants down. ``Ten years ago,'' he said, ``if you would have 
told me about something like that, I never would have believed it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>