<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0121 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Six years ago, with smoke from the burning oil wells of Kuwait barely 
cleared, Congress ordered the federal government to help wean America 
from gasoline, and decided that by 1998, half of all new government 
vehicles should be able to run on an alternative fuel. The Postal 
Service announced last month that to comply, it would buy 10,000 new 
delivery trucks that can run on ethanol or gasoline, and that the 
first would be delivered for use in the New York City region. But 
while the vehicles can use ethanol, Postal Service officials say, 
they probably will not. That is because the nearest public ethanol 
station is in Indianapolis. In fact, there are only about 40 stations 
in the whole country that sell ethanol, according to vehicle manufacturers. 
``The ethanol-capable vehicles will be all over,'' said a Postal Service 
spokeswoman, Sandra Harding. She said the vehicles would be sent wherever 
new trucks were needed, regardless of what fuels were available. ``If 
they don't have ethanol available in certain areas, then the automobile 
will just run on gasoline,'' she said. The first of the new postal 
vehicles, modified Ford Explorers with their steering wheels on the 
right so that letter carriers can easily reach mailboxes, will begin 
arriving in May. In New Jersey, Newark will get 100; Paterson, 53; 
Lakewood, 73, and Bellmawr, 50. Hicksville, N.Y., on Long Island, 
will get 84. State officials in New Jersey and New York said they 
knew of no public fueling site within their borders that sold ethanol. 
Environmentalists, who have been urging the use of alternative fuels 
for years as a way to reduce dependence on oil and to lower auto emissions, 
are not happy about the outcome. ``There's an absurdity, an irrationality, 
having these vehicles and not having fuel for them,'' said Nevin Cohen, 
the director of research at Inform, a nonprofit environmental research 
group based in New York. The federal government, he said, had tried 
to be ``fuel-neutral,'' meaning that it backed a variety of alternatives 
to gasoline without choosing one over the others. But, he said, ``This 
isn't fuel-neutral; it's fuel-nutty.'' ``Natural gas would have made 
more sense,'' said Cohen, who pointed out that United Parcel Service 
and other operators of large fleets use natural gas vehicles in the 
New York region. The Postal Service should send the new trucks to 
the Midwest, he said. In fact, the Postal Service says that it runs 
7,300 vehicles nationwide that use alternative fuels, some of them 
natural gas, but that some of those have to operate on gasoline because 
natural gas is not available. And buying a truck that can use natural 
gas (even if it does not) costs about $4,000 extra; buying one that 
can use ethanol (even if it does not) costs only about $200 extra. 
Some Postal Service vehicles get their fuel from public gas pumps, 
but major post offices often have their own pumps. The Postal Service 
is resisting the idea that it should have ethanol or natural gas pumps 
for its own vehicles. ``We can't be a part-time utility company or 
a part-time oil company,'' said Wayne Corey, a vehicle maintenance 
manager with the Postal Service. ``That's what those people are in 
business for.'' Faced with the problem of meeting the 50 percent quota 
for vehicles that run on alternative fuels _ the quota rose to 75 
percent in fiscal year 1999, which began Oct. 1 _ the Postal Service 
had acted reasonably, Corey said. The problem, he and others say, 
is that the continuing drop in the price of gasoline, combined with 
corporate streamlining by oil companies and others involved in the 
manufacture of vehicle fuels, has hindered the development of the 
alternative fuel market. Natural gas, while cheaper than gasoline, 
has been handicapped by the need for expensive compressor stations 
and by the problem of squeezing the tanks into cars. Ethanol, which 
is widely used in ordinary gasoline at blends of up to 10 percent, 
presents other problems. In places where it is publicly available, 
it is commonly sold as E-85, a blend that is 15 percent unleaded gasoline, 
but it costs 10 cents to 15 cents a gallon more than regular unleaded 
gasoline, even with various tax advantages. Ford and Chrysler have 
adapted some of their vehicles for ethanol, because they get credits 
for doing so under the Corporate Average Fuel Economy law, as if their 
vehicles got better gas mileage. But it is likely that many of those 
vehicles will never see a drop of ethanol, either. Ethanol's environmental 
and energy benefits are harder to demonstrate than those of natural 
gas, although the fuel is popular in Congress as a way to subsidize 
farmers, who grow the corn that is one of its main ingredients. Corey 
pointed out that bringing in the ethanol-capable vehicles would improve 
air quality even if they never used ethanol, because they are new 
and meet the latest emission standards. They are replacing vehicles 
that are at least 10 years old, many of them ancient Jeeps. David 
Rodgers, director of the Energy Department's office of technology 
utilization, said he was working with officials at the Postal Service 
to ship the new trucks to places where ethanol is available, even 
though the purchase contract with Ford specified where they would 
be delivered. ``The groups that procure vehicles are using systems 
they have had in place for 50 years,'' he said. ``The groups that 
are promoting alternative fuels are usually in another part of the 
organization, and getting those groups to work together is a problem.'' 
Dennis Baca, manager of environmental policy at the Postal Service, 
said that he was meeting with corn growers and ethanol manufacturers 
to try to increase the supply of fuel, and that the new vehicles, 
which will begin arriving in May, would be kept together to make it 
easier to supply ethanol to them. When introducing a new fuel, Baca 
said, there has always been a question about which would come first, 
the fuel or the vehicles that use it. But he said he hoped the government's 
commitment to the new trucks would encourage suppliers and other companies 
to try alternative fuels, too. ``We are taking some risks,'' he said, 
``in hopes the rest of the country recognizes we all are better served 
by clean air.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>