<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0099 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The last draft was a tale of two quarterbacks _ Peyton Manning and 
Ryan Leaf _ and the third-best prospect was supposed to be Brian Griese. 
Charlie Batch was hardly mentioned. Leaf and Manning were to rise 
to stardom and maybe Griese would later surpass both. But Charlie 
Batch? He was considered a no-name quarterback with a small game from 
a small college, Eastern Michigan, a school 40 miles from Detroit. 
If Batch was lucky, maybe a team would select him in the final couple 
of rounds. And take a chance. The draft outsiders did not recognize 
the best of Batch, the arm, the quickness, the intelligence or the 
poise. The draft insiders did. Denver wanted him before Griese. Detroit 
wanted him more. It traded its third-, fifth- and sixth-round picks 
in the draft to Miami to obtain the Dolphins' spot (via Green Bay) 
in Round 2, the 60th overall pick. Thus, the quarterbacks drafted 
last April fell this way: first pick, Manning to Indianapolis; second 
pick, Leaf to San Diego; 60th pick, Batch to Detroit; 91st pick, Griese 
to Denver. Only one other quarterback, Moses Moreno of Colorado State, 
was drafted, the 232nd pick, by Chicago. Leaf and Manning battle today 
when San Diego plays at Indianapolis. Griese sits for Denver when 
Philadelphia visits. Moreno watches when Detroit plays at Chicago. 
He watches Charlie Batch start. It has been a rush of activity for 
Batch these last few weeks and months, as his pro career rushes to 
prime time, as agonizing pain in his life begins to subside, as his 
dreams become tangible and touchable. Detroit's veteran quarterback, 
Scott Mitchell, was benched as the starter after two games. Batch 
was tossed in as the starter in Week 3 at Minnesota and the Lions 
lost, 29-6. And then, on Monday night, Batch took lessons learned 
from his pro debut and improved, and so did the Lions. Detroit won, 
27-6, over Tampa Bay. Against Chicago (0-4) today, Batch looks for 
more redemption. Leaf and Manning become only the second pair of quarterbacks 
drafted first and second to start against each other in their rookie 
seasons (Drew Bledsoe of New England and Rick Mirer, then of Seattle, 
did it 1993). Manning has no victories. Leaf has two. Batch has one. 
Manning has thrown 11 interceptions. Leaf has thrown 8. Batch has 
thrown 2. Manning's passer rating is 52.1. Leaf's is 32.1. Batch's 
is 52.0. Batch's history is that the more he plays, the more he hears 
and sees, the better he gets. Mitchell, 30, is now widely regarded 
as a quarterback who suffers mental lapses and who cringes under pressure. 
Batch, 23, is becoming known as a man of steel. An ironman. No wonder. 
He is 6 feet 2 inches, 216 pounds, and grew up in Homestead, Pa., 
near Pittsburgh, and before Eastern Michigan he played football at 
Steel Valley High for a team nicknamed the Ironmen. ``I listened to 
all of the TV talk before the draft and my name was never mentioned,'' 
Batch said. ``I had had a good career at Eastern Michigan, but I guess 
people thought because the school is small that it meant nothing. 
I played in four different offenses there: the option, the play-action 
pass, a combination of both and then a pro-style offense. That experience 
helped me learn how to study defenses on film and how to recognize 
coverages. I hate when people talk about me making rookie mistakes. 
In your first game, you're a rookie. The way I see it, after that, 
if you make mistakes they aren't rookie mistakes. They are mental 
errors. ``I have stayed level-headed all of my life and I know that 
things come and go. I know that tomorrow is not guaranteed. Experience 
teaches you how to handle certain things, but it can't be the answer 
for accepting all things. I know this lesson well.'' He learned it 
from the death of his sister, Danyl, 17, who was killed two years 
ago in an accidental, drive-by shooting while walking in her neighborhood 
in Homestead. Batch said a suspect was caught but released because 
of lack of evidence. Batch is finding the tragedy easier to handle; 
harder to accept. It has toughened him. It has made him grow even 
closer to his mother, Lynn Settles, whom he describes as ``my mother, 
my father, my hero.'' It prepared him for the awesome request of being 
an instant starting quarterback in the National Football League. The 
Lion coaches say that Batch is good at learning on the run. They say 
they seldom have to teach him anything twice. He has completed 34 
of 63 passes for 275 yards. He has yet to throw his first touchdown 
pass. But already, he is providing stability at a position where the 
Lions have been lacking. His quarterback role models are Dan Marino 
in Miami and Randall Cunningham in Minnesota. He grew up watching 
both, Marino at the University of Pittsburgh and Cunningham with the 
Philadelphia Eagles. ``We showed against Tampa Bay that when we play 
for the full 60 minutes as a unit, we can have great success,'' Batch 
said. ``This team is treating me as a leader, and I respect that. 
I respect my elders. I keep my ears wide open; that's how you learn. 
People are counting us out as a team and we have 12 games left to 
play. I don't understand that.'' That's OK. The kid from 40 miles 
away is right at home with doubt and detraction. He has new dreams 
now, and he is showing the Lions, and those who ignored him, something 
different. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>