<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0091 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ma Mingyuan lives on the underside of modern China. In a country where 
newfound prosperity has rewarded many urban residents with computers 
and cell phones, he has seen his living standard fall. Today he has 
neither a job nor health care, nor even a home, beyond a lean-to fashioned 
from blankets and a sheet of tin. A slight, sinewy 50-year-old with 
a gap-toothed grin, Ma earns $2 or $3 day as a sort of free-lance 
garbage collector, coaxing people to pay him to haul away their household 
garbage on his ancient bike-drawn cart. Five years ago he owned a 
small house near the South Gate of Xian's old city center. But in 
1993 the city government evicted him to make way for a redevelopment 
project. Now his home is his lean-to, his bed an old couch and his 
living room two small plastic stools he hospitably places on the sidewalk. 
``What I earn is enough for food, but nothing else,'' he said. The 
number of city dwellers living in poverty is now growing rapidly in 
China. A decade ago, this group was virtually nonexistent. Today, 
Chinese researchers estimate, anywhere from 12 million to more than 
22 million urban residents _ out of an urban population of 200 million 
_ live in ``absolute poverty,'' meaning that they cannot afford basic 
food, clothing or shelter. These urban poor are distinct from the 
large number of poor migrants from the countryside, who come to cities 
in search of work but are not counted as residents. The urban poor 
are mostly unskilled workers, the losers in China's rapid transformation 
to a market economy; the income gap between rich and poor in China 
is probably growing faster than anywhere else on earth, researchers 
say. And in response, city governments are hastily defining poverty 
lines and devising social welfare plans, concerned about the plight 
of the newly poor but also apprehensive about their discontent. ``There 
is a growing urban population living in absolute poverty,'' said Ge 
Yanfeng, director of the Development Research Center, an organization 
associated with China's State Council. ``If the economy remains flat, 
then the number of impoverished urban Chinese is likely to rise.'' 
Under the old planned economy, nearly all Chinese who lived in cities 
were assigned to governmental ``work units,'' which guaranteed them 
a place to live as well as subsidizing food staples, medical care, 
pensions and often schooling for their children. Under this system, 
living standards of urban residents rose steadily, en masse, throughout 
the 1980s. But in the last few years that system has started to crumble: 
many state companies have shut down or downsized, laying off vast 
numbers of workers. Many more are so cash poor that they have not 
been able to pay promised retirement or health benefits, or have severely 
cut back on such commitments for those who still have jobs. And a 
number of people now work in jobs that do not come with housing or 
health care. In 1990, Ge said, the only urban residents who were poor 
were those who were ``disadvantaged'' in some way, perhaps physically 
disabled. ``But today,'' he said, ``probably 90 percent of the impoverished 
population are working poor _ who are working or who used to work.'' 
Homelessness and crime are still, by Western standards, extremely 
rare in China. But evidence of growing urban poverty is readily apparent 
_ beggars surround department stores, homeless people sleep on the 
sidewalks _ even in Beijing, the capital, whose image is normally 
carefully protected. While many of the beggars are transients from 
rural areas, some are from smaller cities and others are home-grown. 
For two months now, Sun Zhongli, 71, a gaunt man with a bright red 
baseball cap, has lived under a bridge near Beijing's central Changan 
Avenue, just a 15-minute walk from the Great Hall of the People. Using 
piles of old magazines covered with a tarpaulin, he has defined for 
himself a private space on this most public of sidewalks. By day he 
begs and dons spectacles to read. By night this is his bed. After 
Sun was laid off from a state-owned construction company about 10 
years ago, he worked as a part-time laborer. Then his legs gave out. 
The man at the concession stand near Sun's den says that Sun's local 
subdistrict government, on the outskirts of Beijing, really ought 
to take care of him. His customers nod, reflecting paternalistic views 
of government absorbed during decades of Communist schooling. But, 
today, it does not. He gets no money from his former employer. Nor 
does he have any children _ still the fall-back social security system 
in China. Researchers say that while most urban poor still have a 
place to live, they often have other kinds of problems: their children 
are poorly nourished or they drop out of school since their parents 
cannot afford the fees. But housing is a looming issue, since China 
is currently transferring much of what was formerly free or heavily 
subsidized government-provided housing onto the private market, asking 
tenants to buy or pay higher rents. China has said it will help the 
urban poor _ after all most are the very workers who were the Communist 
ideal for so many years. ``The Chinese government has been placing 
a great deal of emphasis on dealing with the problem of urban poverty,'' 
Ge said, ``since this is a problem that touches on social stability.'' 
But he added that some city governments were themselves so low on 
cash that they set the subsistence line at inadequate levels _ many 
are under $30 a month _ or cannot come through with payments they 
have committed to make. Labor unions and the Ministry of Civil Affairs 
chip in, too. According to the recently released 1997 China Human 
Development Report for the United Nations, ``China is quite far from 
reaching the goal that the government has proposed for the year 2000 
of establishing a system to insure a minimum living standard of the 
urban population in more than 600 cities.'' The circumstances that 
lead to poverty are diverse: a family's breadwinner loses a job; an 
elderly parent gets sick, requiring extensive unreimbursed medical 
treatment; a state factory stops paying retirement benefits, or once-free 
or low-cost housing ends up in the private market and becomes unaffordable. 
Ma's case falls into the last category. Until 1993 he lived in an 
ancient one-room house that he had inherited. But in that year, the 
city of Xian decided to bulldoze the primitive dwellings in his neighborhood 
to make way for redevelopment, offering free apartments in the new 
complex to longtime tenants who were poor. From the dark recesses 
of his lean-to, Ma pulled out a threadbare but carefully folded contract 
with the city government, which bears his thumbprint as a signature. 
It promises him a free one-bedroom apartment on the ninth floor in 
the new building if he moves out of his old home for 18 months. But 
during that 18 months, the city sold development rights to a construction 
company, which insisted that if Ma wanted to move into the new apartment 
he would have to buy it. So for the last five years, Ma, who belongs 
to the Hui Muslim minority, has moved from place to place, settling 
six months ago in his lean-to in Xian's crowded Muslim neighborhood. 
Some Xian residents who have lost their free housing have staged protests 
against the city and the new developer. Ma made one fruitless visit 
to the company, some months back, but has otherwise not joined in. 
``I'm not a troublemaker,'' he said. And, anyway, he is caught in 
the bind of the working poor everywhere: ``I can't go,'' he said. 
``If I don't work for a day, I don't eat _ it's that simple.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>