<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Former President Gerald R. Ford broke his silence on the White House 
scandal Saturday and suggested that the most fitting punishment for 
President Clinton would be a rebuke in the well of the House, where 
he would stand and listen while Republicans and Democrats denounced 
his conduct. In what may prove to be an important boost for Clinton's 
search for a way to short-circuit the impeachment process, Ford's 
recommendation is striking not only because he breaks ranks with Republican 
leaders who have pressed for impeachment hearings, or called upon 
the president to resign, but also because of his own experience with 
impeachment deliberations. Ford, who made the recommendation in an 
Op-Ed article in Sunday's New York Times, succeeded to the presidency 
in 1974, after President Richard M. Nixon resigned during the impeachment 
proceedings over Watergate. Ford later damaged his own political standing 
by pardoning his predecessor. ``Imagine a president receiving not 
an ovation from the people's representatives, but a harshly worded 
rebuke as rendered by members of both parties,'' Ford wrote. ``I emphasize: 
this would be a rebuke, not a rebuttal by the president. On the contrary, 
by his appearance the president would accept full responsibility for 
his actions, as well as for his subsequent efforts to delay or impede 
the investigation of them. No spinning, no semantics, no evasiveness 
or blaming others for his plight.'' Gregory Craig, the special counsel 
to the president, Saturday welcomed Ford's comments, and he did not 
rule out the possibility of a rebuke. ``Gerald Ford is a man who has 
been there, who understands a situation like this and understands 
the importance of deferring to constitutional standards under all 
circumstances,'' he said in an interview. ``President Ford is absolutely 
right: this kind of conduct simply doesn't rise to the level of an 
impeachable offense.'' Ford weighed in at a crucial point in the White 
House scandal. Now that the House Judiciary Committee on Friday released 
the final trove of evidence in its consideration of impeachment charges, 
the scandal has shifted to political grounds. The committee is scheduled 
to meet Monday, and its Republican majority is widely expected to 
recommend a formal House impeachment inquiry. David Schippers, the 
chief investigative counsel for House Republicans, plans to appear 
before the committee to expand the current list of 11 possible grounds 
for impeachment of Clinton to include counts involving making false 
statements under oath and trying to conceal a crime, Republican officials 
said. They said Schippers would insist that the case is not about 
sex. White House lawyers and political aides said they were devoting 
the weekend to scouring the 4,600 pages of newly released testimony 
and transcripts, seeking evidence to support their case that Independent 
Counsel Kenneth Starr was motivated by partisan gain. Three senior 
White House officials in interviews Saturday offered scathing remarks 
about Starr's report to Congress. ``If you look at what's in all the 
10,000 pages that are out, the story is it's the incredible shrinking 
Starr referral,'' said Joe Lockhart, the White House press secretary. 
In his harshest comments about the Starr report, Craig asserted: ``This 
was not written for the purpose of informing or educating the decision 
makers. It was written to trash the president with the American people 
and to inflame the jury, which is the Congress.'' Rahm Emanuel, a 
senior political aide to the president, said of Starr, ``He's got 
more legal manipulation than he does legal analysis.'' Even as the 
Congress moves toward a formal impeachment inquiry, Democratic lawmakers 
have been moving aggressively behind the scenes to explore ways to 
reach a settlement that could save the president _ and the Congress 
_ from a protracted impeachment process. Sen. John Rockefeller of 
West Virginia and John Breaux of Louisiana, who are both close to 
Clinton, approached Sen. Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut more than 
a week ago to begin talks on an appropriate punishment short of impeachment 
that could be supported by the Senate, several people familiar with 
the discussions said. These people all spoke only on the condition 
of anonymity. The talks were described as ongoing and informal, and 
the senators have discussed several options _ ones not unlike the 
suggestion of former President Ford _ including the possibility that 
Clinton be rebuked with something stronger than a formal censure by 
Congress but not a full impeachment. ``There's a feeling that it's 
got to be beyond censure,'' said a Senate official who is close to 
the talks. ``This is not looking for ways to defend the president. 
It is looking for ways to make it clear that what he did was unacceptable 
but also listening to what the American people want: to wrap this 
thing up and move on.'' Another official said the point of the discussions 
was to see ``whether or not there's a center of gravity in the Senate,'' 
and, specifically, whether where was ``an operating majority on a 
strong censure.'' This person argued that ``while people do not want 
to get in the way of the House of Representatives,'' the position 
of the Senate was nevertheless critical because ``Gingrich said he 
wouldn't move'' on impeachment ``unless there were enough senators 
to get 67 votes.'' He referred to House Speaker Newt Gingrich. While 
the impeachment process is now in the hands of the House, a simple 
majority would be required to move the process to the Senate, which 
would ultimately vote on any impeachment recommendation. The votes 
of two-thirds of the Senate _ 67 senators _ would be required to convict 
and remove the president. People familiar with the talks said Rockefeller 
had become one of Clinton's staunchest internal defenders and that 
he and Breaux reached out to Lieberman because he also has been close 
to the president and gained credibility as the first Democratic senator 
who rose on the Senate floor to chastise Clinton. The three senators 
have been informally reaching out to other Democrats as well as Republicans 
who could be pivotal to any effort to short-circuit the impeachment 
process, Senate officials said. The Republicans include Orrin Hatch 
of Utah, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, as well as three moderates: 
Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, Olympia Snowe of Maine and James Jeffords 
of Vermont. ``There are probably some Republicans who believe you 
could proceed on this basis,'' said a Democrat close to the conversations. 
Explaining that many voters particularly in the Northeast would not 
want impeachment, he added, ``This could not be good politics in states 
like Maine, Rhode Island, Pennsylvania and New York to be part of 
having the Senate actually receive an impeachment.'' Craig sought 
to tear apart Starr's case, and he argued vigorously that the documents 
made public Friday ``destroy the theory of obstruction of justice.'' 
Specifically, he said, there was no evidence that Vernon Jordan, the 
president's close friend, tried to keep Monica Lewinsky quiet about 
her affair with Clinton by trying to find her a job. ``The statements 
to the grand jury completely eliminate the theory that there was an 
effort to find her a job to secure her silence,'' Craig said. In a 
statement Friday, Starr contended that Craig's initial comments about 
the documents released that day were ``disingenuous.'' He found it 
significant, he said, that the White House has not challenged the 
``credibility or the factual underpinnings of none of the 11 grounds 
for impeachment, including the president's perjury in his deposition 
and before the grand jury.'' Republicans and Democrats alike said 
they did not think the final release of documents would significantly 
alter the already hardened political contours of the struggle over 
impeachment. Sen. Robert Torricelli, D-N.J., said what he perceived 
as partisanship on the part of Republicans had driven more Democrats 
to back Clinton. ``If Washington is being divided into two hostile 
camps and the one camp appears to be unfair and highly partisan that 
only leaves people to identify with President Clinton,'' he said. 
``And to many that is the most comfortable place to be.'' One person 
who is close to the House Democratic leadership said of the document 
release: ``There was a feeling that this next cache of documents would 
provide us with the very best way to at least stall the momentum of 
the Republican argument. I tend to doubt that's going to give us much 
lift for very long.'' While some prominent Republicans, like former 
Sen. Bob Dole, Clinton's rival for the presidency in 1996, have privately 
been receptive to the notion of a settlement that stops short of impeachment, 
no major figure in the party has gone as far as Ford in calling for 
a compromise. The 38th president, who is 85, said Clinton had ``broken 
faith with those who elected him,'' and ``has since been forced to 
take refuge in legalistic evasions.'' Ford explained that while he 
had no interest ``in rescuing'' Clinton, he feared the long-term consequences 
for the nation of trying to remove Clinton from office. But, he asserted, 
``A simple apology is inadequate, and a fine would trivialize his 
conduct by treating it as a mere question of monetary restitution.'' 
Ford said of his recommendation: ``Anyone who confuses this scenario 
with a slap on the wrist, or a censure written in disappearing ink, 
underestimates the historical impact of such a pronouncement.'' Despite 
Ford's recommendation, and the drive in the Senate to find an end 
to the scandal, private deliberations in the House over a deal with 
Clinton have halted for now, people who have been involved in the 
discussions said. Democrats who had pressed for a solution said it 
was clear that Republicans would not be willing to reach any accommodation 
before Election Day, and that there was no consensus even among Democrats 
as to how the matter should be settled. People involved in the talks 
said the political environment was greatly unsettled, and that many 
lawmakers are bracing for other potential turns in the case, like 
indictments from Starr or the possibility appointment by the Justice 
Department of an independent counsel to examine campaign finance accusations 
against Clinton. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>