<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0152 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serbian authorities took foreign reporters to a rocky crevice on this 
mountain Saturday to show them four skulls and other human remains 
buried near a former hideout of the Kosovo Liberation Army. They said 
the remains were discovered on Friday by soldiers of the Yugoslav 
Army who had reclaimed the mountain from the ethnic Albanian separatists 
several weeks ago. Two skulls were lying on the ground at the bottom 
of a crevice when the reporters arrived, along with two femurs on 
a path leading to the crevice. Three laborers, supervised by technicians 
from the Serbian police, lifted rocks and dug through the earth with 
shovels. The laborers found two more skulls, some bones, debris from 
what looked like civilian clothing and two boots. A strong odor of 
decayed bodies permeated the site. The spokesman for the Serbian Interior 
Ministry police, Col. Bozidar Filic, said it appeared that the people 
had been killed by the guerrillas three or four months ago, and buried 
there. Col. Filic was careful to say that there was as yet no proof 
of the ethnic origins of the people killed. He said that six or seven 
people, including some Serbs and two Gypsies, had been missing from 
the area for the last three months. One of the missing is a Serbian 
police officer, Ranko Remistar, from the nearby town of Klina, he 
said. ``We can just assume these are the missing people but we don't 
know,'' Filic said. ``We cannot tell for sure.'' The effort to show 
the site appeared designed to counter the international attention 
given to last weekend's massacre, apparently by Serbian forces, of 
18 members of an ethnic Albanian family in the village of Gornje Obrinje 
and the execution of 13 ethnic Albanian men at nearby Golubovac. The 
official Serbian press has called the massacre of the family a fake. 
Peter Bouckaert, a researcher with Human Rights Watch, who saw the 
human remains at the site Saturday, said it appeared from the condition 
of the remains that they had been there for about three months. Bouckaert 
said that one of the skulls had a bullet wound. The discovery of the 
remains raised again, Bouckaert said, the importance of forensic experts 
from the war crimes tribunal in The Hague being allowed to exhume 
and examine bodies from both sides in the Kosovo conflict. The question 
of how to investigate massacres and possible war crimes in Kosovo 
has become increasingly heated. Ethnic Albanian political leaders, 
who want Kosovo province to secede from Serbia, have called for experts 
from the Hague tribunal to come. The Yugoslav president, Slobodan 
Milosevic, has refused these requests, which have also been made from 
Washington. Two of the tribunal's investigators were in Kosovo last 
week but were not carrying forensic equipment. There were no Serbian 
forensic experts at the site Saturday, which is at the end of a dirt 
path that winds up the mountain some three miles southwest of Klina. 
Two police technicians videotaped the site and put the remains into 
plastic bags. These were to be taken to the hospital in Pec where 
forensic specialists from Belgrade, the Yugoslav capital, would examine 
them, said Veselim Cadzenovic, an investigating judge from Pec. Cadzenovic 
said he was called to the site by the army and that he asked for the 
Serbian forensic experts to take charge of the remains at the Pec 
hospital. Reflecting a commonly held position of Serbian officials 
in Kosovo, Cadzenovic said that from what he had seen on Serbian television 
the massacre of the 18 ethnic Albanian civilians of the Deliaj family, 
including children and women, was ``stage managed.'' Early last month, 
the Serbian authorities discovered 34 bodies in a canal at Glodjane 
in central Kosovo and said they were mostly Serbian civilians killed 
by the Kosovo Liberation Army. International diplomatic monitors reported 
that the claims by the Serbian authorities seemed credible. There 
was more doubt, the monitors said, about another site discovered at 
Klecka in Kosovo in late August where the Serbian authorities said 
22 Serbs had been burned by the separatist guerrillas in a lime kiln. 
The monitors said they were not sure that the kiln could reach the 
high temperatures required to burn the bodies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>