<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In his report to the House, Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, 
cited ``substantial and credible information that President Clinton 
endeavored to obstruct justice'' by concealing gifts to Monica Lewinsky 
that could be used as evidence in Paula Jones' lawsuit against the 
president and by helping Ms. Lewinsky obtain a job while she was a 
potential witness in the Jones case. Starr's office questioned several 
witnesses on those points over months of grand jury proceedings. Here 
are excerpts from the testimony of some of the witnesses, made public 
by the House Judiciary Committee. Gifts to Lewinsky Betty Currie The 
President's Secretary Before the Grand Jury Jan. 27, 1998 Q.: You 
told us when we met with you over these last three days that Ms. Lewinsky 
gave you a bunch of items. A.: Mm-hmm. ... Q.: And explain to us what 
happened. A.: Monica said she was getting concerned, and she wanted 
to give me the stuff the President had given her _ or give me a box 
of stuff. It was a box of stuff. ... Q.: What did you do with the 
box? A.: I put it under my bed. Q.: Did Ms. Lewinsky tell you why 
she wanted to give you this box of items? A.: I think she was just 
getting concerned. I think people were asking questions about stuff 
she had gotten. Q.: Do you know who had been asking the questions? 
A.: Sir, no, I don't. May 5, 1998 Q.: And did the President tell you 
to call Monica, and he was the one that said, ``Monica has something 
for you to hold, has some stuff that she wants you to keep for a while?'' 
A.: I don't remember that. Q.: You're saying it didn't happen, or 
is it probable that it happened? A.: My recollection _ the best I 
remember is Monica calling me and asking if I'd hold some gifts for 
her. I said I would. Q.: And did the President know you were holding 
these things for Monica? A.: I don't know. I don't know. Q.: Didn't 
he say to you that Monica had something for you to hold? A.: I don't 
remember that. I don't. Q.: Did you ever talk to the President and 
tell him you had this box from Monica? A.: I don't remember that either. 
Q.: Do you think it happened, though? A.: I don't know. I don't know. 
Q.: What exactly did Monica say when _ A.: The best I remember she 
said that she wanted me to hold these gifts _ hold this _ she may 
have said gifts, I'm sure she said gift, box of gifts _ I don't remember 
_ because people were asking questions. And I said, ``Fine.'' ... 
Q.: So you knew that some of the gifts in the box were from the President. 
A.: I knew that some of them _ yes, she told me that. Q.: She told 
you that. What else did she say was in the box? A.: I don't think 
she said. The box were gifts. ... Q.: Was it your understanding also 
that some of the questions that were being asked were related to the 
Paula Jones lawsuit? A.: The question is, did I think the questions 
that were being asked were related to Paula Jones' lawsuit? Q.: Right. 
A.: I don't remember what Isikoff _ I don't remember if there was 
_ Q.: Where did this exchange take place that she actually gave you 
the box? A.: Now, the best I remember, that I went to her house _ 
I drove to her _ outside of her residence and picked up the box. ... 
Q.: Did you go with anyone to pick up the box? A.: It was after work 
and I was by myself. Q.: So it would be fair to say it was pretty 
important to pick it up. A.: I wouldn't say that. May 6, 1998 Q.: 
Did Monica say anything about someone else wanting these gifts? A.: 
No. Q.: These items? A.: No. Q.: Are you sure she did not say that? 
A.: Sir, to the best that I can remember, I do not remember her ever 
saying that. Q.: What about the President's knowledge about Monica 
turning over to you the gifts he had given her? A.: I don't know. 
Q.: Did you talk to him about it? A.: I don't remember talking to 
him about that, about the gifts. Q.: If Monica said you did, would 
that not be true? A.: If Monica said I talked to the President about 
it? Q.: Right. A.: Then she may remember better than I. I don't remember. 
July 22, 1998 JUROR: During this conversation with the President, 
did you discuss the fact that you had a box of Monica's belongings 
under your bed? THE WITNESS: I'm sure not. ... JUROR: Mrs. Currie, 
I wanted to come back for a second to the box of gifts and how they 
came to be in your possession. As I recall your earlier testimony 
during the other days, you testified that the President asked you 
to telephone Monica. Is that correct? THE WITNESS: Pardon? The President 
asked me to telephone Monica? JUROR: Is that correct? THE WITNESS: 
About? JUROR: About the box of gifts or about a box. I'm trying to 
recall and understand exactly how that box of gifts came to be in 
your possession. THE WITNESS: I do not recall the President asking 
me to call about a box of gifts. JUROR: How did you come to be in 
possession of the box of gifts, then? THE WITNESS: The best I remember 
is Monica calls me and asks me if she can give me some gifts, if I'd 
pick up some gifts from her. JUROR: And did she tell you what kind 
of gifts they were. THE WITNESS: She did not. JUROR: She didn't tell 
you that they were gifts from the President. THE WITNESS: She did 
not. JUROR: Did she tell you why she wanted you to pick them up? THE 
WITNESS: She wanted me to hold them. JUROR: And did you ever discuss 
with the President that you had a box of gifts from Monica? THE WITNESS: 
I don't remember talking about the gifts at all. JUROR: Did you discuss 
with him that you picked anything up from Monica? THE WITNESS: I don't 
_ JUROR: That Monica had given you anything? THE WITNESS: I don't 
remember talking to him at all about gifts. JUROR: Well, never mind 
_ put aside gifts. About any box of any material that Monica had given 
you to hold? THE WITNESS: No. JUROR: Did you have any understanding 
of why Monica gave you this box? THE WITNESS: She said to hold them. 
I don't know if she was moving and wanted me to _ it would be safer 
with me. I didn't know what they were. She just asked me to hold her 
gifts. JUROR: Did you have any impression yourself that these might 
have been gifts from the President? Did you have any suspicion of 
that? THE WITNESS: I don't think I thought much more about it. I picked 
them up, took them home, put them under the bed and left them there. 
BY MS. IMMERGUT: Q.: You previously testified you understood that 
they were gifts from the President. A.: Then if I testified to that, 
then I stand corrected. If that's what I said. Monica Lewinsky Before 
the Grand Jury Aug. 6, 1998 (Describing a telephone conversation and 
meeting with Mrs. Currie) Q.: What did she say? A.: She said, ``I 
understand you have something to give me.'' Or, ``The President said 
you have something to give me.'' Along those lines. Q.: How long after 
you had left the White House did Betty call you? A.: Several hours. 
Q.: When she said something along the lines of ``I understand you 
have something for me,'' or ``The President says you have something 
for me,'' what did you understand her to mean? A.: The gifts. ... 
Q.: O.K. Let me just ask you some questions. Did you ever discuss 
with her the contents of the box? A.: I don't believe so. Q.: Did 
she ever ask about the contents of the box? A.: No. Q.: Did she ever 
say anything indicating that she knew from a prior discussion the 
contents of the box? A.: Not _ no, not that I remember. Q.: Sounds 
like it was a short conversation. A.: We talked about her mom a bit 
and Christmas. I think maybe I had elaborated on what I got for Christmas 
from him. Q.: Now, you could have just thrown these items out, rather 
than putting them in a box. Why didn't you just throw them out? A.: 
Because I _ they meant a lot to me. Q.: O.K. You could have given 
the items to someone else, a friend of yours, Ashley Raines or to 
your mother or just hidden them somewhere. Why didn't you do that? 
A.: I think _ I've come to sort of see this now. I don't know that 
I necessarily saw it then, but I feel now a little bit that me turning 
over some of these things was a little bit of an assurance to the 
President or reassurance that, you know, that everything was O.K. 
Q.: In your mind, then, were you giving these items not just to Betty, 
but really to the President as well, in a manner of speaking? A.: 
I think that was even more directly what I thought it was. Not that 
they were going to be in his possession, but that he would understand 
whatever it was I gave to Betty and that that might make him feel 
a little bit better. Q.: Did Betty say where she was going to put 
the box of gifts? A.: I think she said she was going to keep them 
in a closet. Or, you know, she'd keep the box in a closet. President 
Clinton Before the Grand Jury Aug. 17, 1998 A.: ... I did have a conversation 
with Ms. Lewinsky at some time about gifts, the gifts I'd given her. 
... A.: ... My recollection is that Ms. Lewinsky said something to 
me like, ``What if they ask me about the gifts you've given me?'' 
That's the memory I have. That's why I question whether it happened 
on the 28th, because she had a subpoena with her, request for production. 
And I told her that if they asked her for gifts, she'd have to give 
them whatever she had, that that's what the law was. ... Q.: After 
you gave her the gifts on Dec. 28th, did you speak with your secretary, 
Ms. Currie, and ask her to pick up a box of gifts that were some compilation 
of gifts that Ms. Lewinsky would have? A.: No sir, I didn't do that. 
... Q.: ... Did you ever have a conversation with Betty Currie about 
gifts, or picking something up from Monica Lewinsky? A.: I don't believe 
I did, sir. No. Q.: You never told her anything to this effect, that 
Monica has something to give you? A.: No, sir. Q.: That is to say, 
Betty Currie? A.: No, sir, I didn't. I don't have any memory of that 
whatever. Q.: And so you have no knowledge that, or you had no knowledge 
at the time, that Betty Currie went and picked up, your secretary 
went and picked up from Monica Lewinsky items that were called for 
by the Jones subpoena and hid them under her bed? You had no knowledge 
that anything remotely like that was going to happen? A.: I did not. 
I did not know she had those items, I believe, until that was made 
public. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>