<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0125 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It usually takes a precipitous change in the sunny weather _ something, 
say, the magnitude of El Nino _ to shake the relative calm of this 
sleepy Southern California city. But like people in much of the rest 
of the country right now, San Diegans are excited about baseball again. 
And not just because their Padres have a shot at reaching the World 
Series for the first time since 1984, when they made their only appearance. 
There is also a hotly contested referendum on the Nov. 3 ballot to 
contend with, Proposition C. Yes, the Padres were set to play host 
to the Houston Astros on Saturday night at a sold-out Qualcomm Stadium, 
with the National League division series tied at one apiece. But unless 
the measure for building a new ball park is approved by voters next 
month, there is speculation _ at least in the national news media 
_ that the Padres might be headed to northern Virginia after next 
season. Team president Larry Lucchino, who was recruited from the 
Orioles and who presided over the building of Camden Yards, has strong 
ties in the area, after all. If so, San Diego will be without major 
league baseball for the first time in more than 30 years. And since 
the vote is expected to be close, Proposition C is all that people 
seem to be talking about around here. That, and this weekend's games 
with the Astros, of course. ``We're free agents at the end of 1999,'' 
said the Padres' principal owner, John Moores, who is generally credited 
with saving the franchise since buying about 80 percent of the team 
during the last players' strike. ``But our first preference is to 
stay in San Diego.'' Build it, or we will go. Sound familiar? The 
theme has been played out in major league cities from coast to coast 
over the last few years. Make no mistake, though. Moores is no Wayne 
Huizenga, who has been vilified throughout the sport for dismantling 
his Florida Marlins almost from the moment they won the World Series 
last fall. Instead, Moores, who likes to make large contributions 
to local universities, is considered something of a hero around San 
Diego. After all, he bought the team from Tom Werner (whose ownership 
group oversaw the fire sale of a talented squad in the early part 
of this decade) and _ with Lucchino _ quickly turned it back around. 
In 1996, the Padres won the National League West in the final weekend 
of the season. They won the NL West again this year, going away, with 
a franchise-record 98 victories. In the process, the Padres set an 
attendance record of 2,555,901 _ up nearly a million and a half from 
three years ago _ in a stadium that was remodeled exclusively for 
football purposes during all of last year. But in resuscitating the 
franchise, Moores says he has lost more than $50 million in cash alone 
since buying the team for approximately $80 million in December 1994. 
Moores, who made his fortune in the computer software business, said 
he will still try to sign his four high-profile free agents _ Kevin 
Brown, Wally Joyner, Ken Caminiti and Steve Finley _ regardless of 
whether a new ball park is approved. But Moores' general manager did 
not sound so sure that was possible without approval of the ballot 
proposal. ``We haven't talked to any of our free agents yet,'' Kevin 
Towers said in Houston earlier this week. ``They realize the stadium 
issue is huge, or we would have started talking to them by now. And 
I think the city of San Diego realizes that if we end up having to 
stay at Qualcomm, will we be able to field a club with a $50 million 
payroll every year? I don't think so.'' And so it is easy to draw 
parallels between this season's Padres and last season's Marlins. 
But this is not the story of a franchise built to win a World Series 
one year, then disassembled piece by piece the next. ``I don't see 
this ever getting that bad if the stadium doesn't go through,'' Towers 
said. ``But it will certainly affect what we do in the off season 
with our free agents and the potential free agents that are out there.'' 
The Padres' quest for a new ball park is actually closer to the saga 
of the 1995 Seattle Mariners, who gained approval for a new stadium, 
mostly by winning a lot of games. ``Maybe it will help sway the stadium 
vote,'' Towers said. Perhaps. But as Padres manager Bruce Bochy said: 
``There's no guarantee that having a winning season will get us a 
new ball park. We just hope people realize we need a new ball park 
not just to be competitive, but to be contenders, regardless of what 
happens in the playoffs this year.'' At issue is an estimated $411 
million proposal for a 26-block redevelopment project in downtown 
San Diego, close to the city's Gaslamp Quarter. If the measure is 
passed, the majority of the money for the project would come from 
a hotel tax. The Padres would have to come up with approximately $115 
million, most of which would likely be generated by naming rights 
to the stadium, as well as potential licensing agreements. In other 
words, tourists and corporations would foot the bill. So, it is fair 
to ask, what's the problem? Apparently, there are plenty. First, many 
residents here were angered at how the City Council approved a new 
lease for the Chargers and funding the National Football League demanded 
for the renovations of Qualcomm last year, essentially behind the 
voters' backs. Moores then pointed out that the city might be sick 
of ballot issues, thanks to the Qualcomm renovations, a recent measure 
that approved funding an expansion of the city's convention center, 
and some contentious City Council elections that followed everything 
else. Furthermore, there are questions about whether there will be 
adequate parking and transportation downtown. (There are trolley and 
train lines, however, and Qualcomm's parking situation has long been 
a mess.) Some neighborhood groups have protested that they have not 
been heard by the ball park's planners. And, because San Diego is 
basically a conservative town, there is speculation that the vote 
may eventually be decided by how the stock market stands on Election 
Day, and if the public fears that it may have to foot the bill for 
some of the funding. After all, tourism, long the city's staple, could 
decline as a result of a protracted downturn on Wall Street. Still, 
Moores said, ``I'm optimistic, but not overly confident.'' And if 
the measure fails? ``We'll jump off that bridge when we come to it,'' 
Moore said. And maybe surface in Virginia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>