<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0021 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Yankees were 10 outs from clinching their American League 
division series against the Rangers Friday night when a Texas-sized 
rainstorm blew through the Dallas area and left both teams sitting 
and waiting to play the final few innings. The Yankees led, 4-0, with 
two outs in the sixth inning of Game 3 of the three-of-five-game playoffs, 
when the storm hit and sent both teams and the fans scurrying for 
cover, at 10:08 p.m. Eastern daylight time. Two hours later, the rains 
dissipated and the grounds crew began to remove the tarpaulin _ but 
then the rains resumed and the tarp went back on the infield. Officials 
from the Yankees, who won the first two games of the series, the Rangers 
and the American League met and determined that every attempt would 
be made to finish the game early Saturday morning. There was a chance 
the game would be suspended, with the score 4-0 and two outs in the 
bottom of the sixth, to be resumed Saturday at 1:07 p.m. EDT. In the 
event it is necessary to resume the game Saturday and the Yankees 
blow their lead and lose _ forcing a Game 4 _ American League officials 
plan to clear the ballpark of all fans with tickets for Game 3 and 
play Game 4 a half-hour later. Fans with Game 4 tickets would then 
be allowed into the ballpark. There has never been a suspended game 
in the baseball postseason. Friday night's downpour follows one of 
the driest summers on record in the Dallas area. Shane Spencer had 
added to his growing legend and David Cone was working on a two-hit 
shutout when the rains stopped the game. Accompanied by wind and rain, 
Spencer's home run in the top of the sixth inning seemed to be right 
out of the movie ``The Natural.'' As the sixth inning started with 
the game scoreless, the flags on the top rim of the Ballpark at Arlington 
turned and stiffened, under attack from a northeast wind that signaled 
the onset of a storm. Paul O'Neill waited on a curveball from Aaron 
Sele and smashed it over the wall in left-center field, scattering 
the members of the Yankees' bullpen, for a 1-0 lead. Bernie Williams 
struck out, the second out of the inning, with the wind blowing harder. 
Tino Martinez chopped a single into the hole between short and third 
before Tim Raines reached out and slapped a line drive toward the 
left-field corner. When the Rangers' Rusty Greer cut off the ball 
and kept it from bouncing against the wall, Martinez was forced to 
stop at third base. Dick Bosman, the Texas pitching coach, went to 
the mound to speak with Sele, and rain began falling during their 
conversation. Many fans rushed from their seats to find cover. In 
Spencer's first at-bat of the game, Sele had thrown him a curveball, 
and Spencer had taken a great swing _ but managed only to lift a high 
fly to center field. Spencer grimaced in frustration after returning 
to the dugout, feeling he had missed a chance to drive the ball. Spencer 
probably walked to the plate thinking about that pitch. With his first 
offering to Spencer, Sele spun a breaking ball. Spencer waited for 
the ball to curve downward, then dropped the head of his bat on the 
ball, blasting it to left field. Greer turned around and watched it 
disappear into the first rows of the stands for a three-run homer. 
Spencer circled the bases with a small grin on his face, as the storm 
descended on the ballpark with thunder and lightning. Spencer's mother 
says that when her son played for Class AAA Columbus, he would never 
volunteer his successes, shyly avoiding the subject until she asked 
directly. But there's no hiding his current binge: The whole baseball 
world now knows about Shane Spencer. Two outs into the bottom of the 
sixth inning, the full force of the storm hammered the ballpark, virtually 
emptying the seats that aren't under cover. Cone walked off the mound 
in disgust, probably realizing there would be a long delay and that 
he probably wouldn't return to the mound. During the 162-game regular 
season, umpires probably would have waited until the completion of 
the sixth inning before stopping the action, and then would have called 
off the rest of the game and the Yankees would have been 4-0 victors. 
During the postseason, however, the leagues make every possible effort 
to complete nine-inning games, particularly when one team has built 
a lead, as the Yankees did Friday night. INSIDE PITCH: Scott Brosius 
turned his ankle in the fifth inning Friday night while trying to 
return to first base on a pickoff throw from Texas catcher Ivan Rodriguez. 
Brosius was tagged out and stumbled, rolling over his left ankle. 
After being treated on the field and between innings, he remained 
in the game, although his mobility was clearly affected. ... When 
Juan Gonzalez was asked whether the 1998 Yankees are better than the 
1996 team that dispatched the Rangers in four games and went on to 
capture the World Series title, the Texas outfielder said it was no 
contest. ``It's a better team now, much better,'' he said. When Gonzalez 
was asked in which areas, he said: ``Completely. Starters. Relief. 
Closer. Defense. Speed. Everything. They won 114 games.'' Interestingly, 
by saying the Yankees have a better closer, Gonzalez is saying that 
Mariano Rivera is better than John Wetteland, the former Yankee who 
is now Gonzalez's teammate. ... Cleveland pitcher Dwight Gooden, a 
former teammate of Darryl Strawberry's with the Mets and Yankees, 
released a statement saying, ``We have been through a lot together 
over the years, and I will do whatever I have to for him to help him 
through this.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>