<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0079 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Like other former British colonies in the Caribbean, this is a country 
that has always venerated the rule of law. But the government here 
is now facing widespread international condemnation following its 
withdrawal from both U.N. and Inter-American human-rights conventions 
because of its dissatisfaction with restrictions they impose on use 
of the death penalty. The decision to defy foreign critics in order 
to speed up hanging condemned criminals has been greeted with broad 
popular support in this twin-island nation of 1.3 million people and 
with calls to execute those waiting on death row swiftly. What underlies 
the move and the nationalist sentiment it has sparked are frustration 
with a judicial system still obeisant to Britain and with international 
organizations that are seen as indifferent to local problems. The 
issue of crime and capital punishment has roiled the entire English-speaking 
Caribbean since 1994. That was when the Privy Council in London, the 
final court of appeal for Trinidad and a dozen other countries in 
the region, ruled that prisoners who had been held for more than five 
years on death row had been subjected to cruel and unusual punishment 
and that their sentences should be commuted to life imprisonment. 
Trinidadian officials maintain that as a result of the ruling, lawyers 
for inmates sentenced to death here have filed appeals with the principal 
purpose of keeping their clients alive past the five-year deadline. 
Both the United Nations and the Organization of American States offer 
appeal mechanisms for capital cases, and local defense lawyers have 
used them once all possibilities in Trinidad have been exhausted. 
With so many avenues of appeal, and a growing prison population, ``we 
cannot fit within the time frame of five years,'' Trinidad's attorney 
general, Ramesh Maharaj, said in an interview. ``We have pleaded with 
these international bodies to set up structures that hear these cases 
promptly and allow us to comply with our national law,'' he said, 
``but there are too many delays that are obstructing the government 
from implementing the death penalty.'' The government's inability 
to hang prisoners convicted by juries on murder charges in trials 
in which fairness is not at issue ``is undermining the public's confidence 
in the criminal justice system,'' Maharaj continued. ``And when society 
becomes unsure that justice can punish people who commit crimes, then 
democracy is threatened and society is put at risk.'' Citing the same 
concerns about crime and punishment, other Caribbean nations have 
taken or are contemplating similar actions. Earlier this year, Jamaica 
also withdrew from the U.N. accord, while Guyana said in August that 
it might soon follow suit; Barbados, on the other hand, has been studying 
the possibility of removing Queen Elizabeth as head of state and becoming 
a republic in order not to have to submit to the Privy Council ruling. 
More than 250 prisoners are currently on death row across the English-speaking 
Caribbean, according to figures provided by governments and human-rights 
groups. Trinidad tops the list, with 107 prisoners convicted of capital 
crimes and awaiting execution, followed by Jamaica, with 47, and the 
Bahamas, with an estimated 40. In July, the twin-island federation 
of St. Kitts and Nevis, whose population of 46,000 makes it the smallest 
country in the Western Hemisphere, executed its first prisoner since 
becoming independent in 1983. Jamaica has ordered its first execution 
in a decade, that of a 29-year-old hitchhiker convicted of strangling 
a business executive who gave him a ride. Though his hanging was postponed 
in order that one last appeal of the death writ be heard, the government 
remains committed to the principle of capital punishment. ``If hanging 
is the penalty, as it is in Jamaica, then those who ought to hang, 
ought to hang,'' said the minister of public security, Keith Knight, 
whose office faces a murder rate three times that of New York City. 
``Otherwise,'' he said, ``the law will become a laughingstock.'' Trinidad's 
stance is the most assertive, however, and has been especially criticized 
by human-rights groups. ``History shows that governments which try 
to isolate their citizens by removing themselves from international 
scrutiny usually do so because they have something to hide,'' the 
British-based human-rights group Caribbean Lifelines said, while Amnesty 
International urged the government of Prime Minister Basdeo Panday 
to ``reconsider the retrograde step it has taken.'' Trinidad's decision 
``restricts the rights of all victims of human-rights abuse to access 
the protections offered by the Inter-American human-rights system,'' 
Jose Miguel Vivanco, executive director of the Americas division of 
Human Rights Watch, complained to Panday in a letter in June. ``With 
this dramatic step, your government has rescinded all of the convention's 
broad civil and political rights protections.'' In the interview, 
Maharaj rejected that argument, saying that neither due process nor 
civil rights have been affected by the government's withdrawal from 
the Organization of American States human-rights convention, which 
will formally take effect next year. He said Trinidad intends to reaccede 
to the U.N. convention ``with reservations on capital punishment'' 
and suggested that Trinidad's critics should direct their energies 
elsewhere. ``The death penalty is not a human-rights issue,'' he said. 
``It has been made an issue by certain institutions and European countries 
that believe the death penalty should not be carried out under any 
circumstances and have made opposition to it a part of their legal 
culture.'' Many of the same groups and countries have made similar 
complaints about the United States. But the United States has ratified 
neither the Inter-American convention nor the United Nations' ``optional 
protocol'' on capital punishment, so American prisoners cannot appeal 
death sentences to the international bodies. The Trinidadian government's 
position appears to have won the support not only of the populace, 
which is alarmed at a rising crime rate and has long been demanding 
tougher policies, but also of opposition parties. ``We say hang them 
high!'' said the former Prime Minister Patrick Manning, now leader 
of the opposition, in Parliament recently. Widespread publicity given 
to apparently frivolous allegations of cruel and unusual punishment 
on which several court appeals are based has also galvanized public 
opinion. One prisoner cited a lack of shampoo as grounds for commutation, 
Maharaj said, while others have cited noisy fans or bright lights 
outside their cells. ``Once you kill and are found guilty, you should 
be hung,'' Victoria Joseph, a housekeeper and mother of two children 
who says she worries about the crime rate, asserted in an interview 
here. ``We keep them in jail too long now as it is,'' she said, ``and 
now they have come to believe they are not getting enough. No, if 
they are going to hang, then let's do it quick time without all this 
foolishness.'' But some legal experts have suggested that there are 
ways of addressing the issue short of withdrawing from the international 
protocols. Since the death penalty is mandatory in murder cases here, 
one solution, they say, might be to grant more discretion to judges, 
prosecutors and juries. ``Our criminal law in many cases is underdeveloped, 
based on statutes in English law that England itself has revised,'' 
said Anselm Francis, a lecturer in international law at the Institute 
of International Relations at the University of the West Indies campus 
here. ``If we had the concept of first- and second-degree murder and 
plea bargaining, as in the United States,'' Francis said, ``then some 
people might be prepared to say all right'' to something short of 
capital punishment. It appears far more likely, however, that Trinidad 
and its neighbors will simply move to junk the Privy Council altogether. 
Here, as elsewhere in the Caribbean, there is a groundswell of public 
impatience with an institution that is seen as antiquated, the last 
unnecessary remnant of colonialism. ``The law lords don't have a clue 
to the reality of the situation here,'' Lyndon Nebat, a deliveryman 
for a local supermarket chain, said of the judges in London who have 
the power to rule on capital cases. ``They just don't understand our 
needs,'' he said, ``and so they should simply refrain from judging 
our cases and let us do it ourselves.'' At a summit meeting this summer 
of the Caribbean Community, a political and economic body to which 
all English-speaking Caribbean states belong, leaders agreed to replace 
the Privy Council as the region's final court of appeal with a new 
Caribbean Court of Justice. The new body is to have its headquarters 
here, and Maharaj said he expects it to begin operating ``within the 
year.'' In the meantime, the Inter-American court began a hearing 
on capital cases from Trinidad on Aug. 28. The government here refused 
to participate, citing infringement of its sovereignty, and reiterated 
that it plans to follow its own course and ignore the tribunal's order 
not to proceed with any executions. ``International law recognizes 
and authorizes the death penalty,'' Maharaj said. ``It is wrong for 
any country or group of countries to transplant their legal culture 
into the Caribbean. We respect their laws of punishment, and they 
must respect ours.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>