<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In his impeachment report to Congress, Kenneth Starr said he was first 
informed about President Clinton's affair with a White House intern 
by a Pentagon employee, Linda Tripp, who called the Whitewater independent 
counsel's office on the evening of Jan. 12. What the report does not 
disclose is that the independent counsel's office had already been 
tipped off by a lawyer with connections to the Paula Jones sexual 
misconduct lawsuit against Clinton. At least a week before Mrs. Tripp's 
call, Jerome M. Marcus, a Philadelphia lawyer with ties to the Jones 
legal team, informed a law school friend in Starr's office of the 
accusations related to Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky, 
lawyers familiar with Starr's inquiry said Saturday. The tip in early 
January indicates that the independent counsel's office could have 
been developing a strategy to persuade the Justice Department to expand 
the scope of the stalled Whitewater inquiry before the call from Mrs. 
Tripp. That strategy _ arguing a parallel in the efforts by the President's 
friend Vernon Jordan to find jobs for Webster Hubbell, the convicted 
Justice Department official, and Ms. Lewinsky _ prevailed. For months, 
Clinton's lawyers and political advisers have complained that lawyers 
sympathetic to Mrs. Jones' case had fed information to Starr in hopes 
of prompting a criminal inquiry of the president and elevating the 
importance of the Jones sexual harassment lawsuit. After the scandal 
became public later in January, Hillary Rodham Clinton claimed that 
there was ``a vast, right-wing conspiracy'' determined to destroy 
her husband. According to people familiar with the discussions, the 
role of go-between played by a group of conservative lawyers with 
ties to the Jones case created an early and previously undisclosed 
back-channel between Starr's office and Mrs. Tripp. Marcus is one 
of a group of conservative lawyers who assisted the Jones legal team 
and then secretly helped Mrs. Tripp find a lawyer and bring her accusations 
to Starr's attention, according to lawyers familiar with their actions. 
Marcus, a partner with the law firm of Berger &AMP; Montague in Philadelphia, 
did not respond to messages left at his office. Nor would Starr's 
office confirm any involvement by Marcus. ``A person in our office 
did get a heads-up call that some information may be coming or may 
be out there,'' Charles Bakaly, a spokesman for Starr, said Saturday. 
``And this person was instructed that we accept information through 
the front door, and that the appropriate person to contact is Jackie 
Bennett, the Washington deputy.'' Bakaly said it was against the office 
policy to name either the lawyer who tipped off Starr's office in 
early January about the Lewinsky matter, or the particular prosecutor 
who took the phone call. STARR SPOKESMAN DENIES CONSPIRACY Responding 
to White House charges that the investigation of Clinton is the product 
of a conservative conspiracy, Bakaly said, ``We believe these kinds 
of allegations that something was improper or inappropriate are merely 
efforts to divert attention from the facts and evidence that was gathered 
by this office.'' Besides Marcus, the group of lawyers that helped 
Mrs. Tripp included Richard W. Porter, a law partner of Starr's at 
the Chicago firm of Kirkland &AMP; Ellis, and George T. Conway III, 
a partner at Wachtell Lipton Rosen &AMP; Katz in New York. The three 
lawyers, who were all members of the Federalist Society, a conservative 
legal organization whose events have been attended by Starr, helped 
Mrs. Tripp find a new lawyer, James A. Moody, who was also a member 
of the Federalist Society. They then worked together, in secret deliberations 
with Mrs. Tripp's confidante Lucianne Goldberg, a New York literary 
agent, to bring Mrs. Tripp's tapes and story to Starr. Ms. Goldberg 
said Saturday that she had told these lawyers and several other friends 
who are politically conservative about Mrs. Tripp's accusations in 
late December and early January. ``Who else would I go to to get involved 
in something like this?'' Ms. Goldberg asked. ``The people who have 
the most axes to grind.'' The three lawyers who formed a secret bridge 
between Mrs. Tripp and Starr share involvement in the Paula Jones 
case, membership in conservative groups and friendships, some of which 
extended into Starr's office. Long before the Lewinsky matter, Marcus 
had signed a friend of the court brief filed with the Supreme Court 
in support of the Jones case, and he is an outspoken critic of the 
president. In an Op-Ed article published on Sept. 23 in The Washington 
Times, Marcus wrote: ``Mr. Clinton's lies didn't just cover up an 
adulterous act. His lies covered up his selfishness. His lies covered 
up his total lack of respect for the American people, and his lack 
of respect for the house of ours in which we have invited him to live 
for a time.'' FIRM INVESTIGATES LAWYER'S WORK Conway and Porter have 
also done legal work in support of the Jones case. Indeed, Starr himself 
was briefly involved in the Jones case: Before becoming the Whitewater 
independent counsel in August 1994, he helped the Independent Women's 
Forum, a conservative organization, file a friend of the court brief 
in the Jones case. Starr was not paid for his services. On July 31 
of this year, Starr announced that he was taking an unpaid, indefinite 
leave of absence from Kirkland &AMP; Ellis. Earlier this year, Kirkland 
&AMP; Ellis began an internal investigation into whether Porter was 
doing unapproved legal work on the Jones case. Responding by fax, 
Porter said Saturday night: ``The information raised by The New York 
Times is unclear. What is clear is this: I say without qualification 
or parsing, neither I nor my firm has ever offered legal counsel to 
Lucianne Goldberg or Linda Tripp or represented them at any time in 
any way. Porter, who like Marcus is a 1987 graduate of the University 
of Chicago Law School, was also a senior aide in the Bush White House 
and conducted ``opposition research'' for Vice President Dan Quayle, 
which included preparations for Quayle's debate with Al Gore in 1992. 
Conway also played a behind-the-scenes role in the Jones case and 
helped write the Supreme Court brief in the Jones case. He did not 
return calls. EFFORT TO HIDE LINK TO STARR IS DETAILED The three lawyers 
went to great lengths to hide their communications with Ms. Goldberg 
and Starr's office. In early January, Ms. Goldberg had conversations 
with Marcus and Porter to discuss how Mrs. Tripp might contact Starr. 
In her interview on Saturday, Ms. Goldberg described Marcus as ``a 
cutout,'' who was brought into the matter to keep Porter's role obscured 
because of his close ties to Starr. On Jan. 12, several days after 
Marcus' call, Mrs. Tripp contacted Bennett, Starr's deputy, from her 
home in Columbia, Md. Ms. Goldberg said Porter had passed on Bennett's 
office phone number, which she gave to Mrs. Tripp. Mrs. Tripp spoke 
with Bennett for 90 minutes. At 10:30 p.m., three prosecutors and 
an FBI agent climbed into a van and rushed to Mrs. Tripp's home, where 
they spoke with her for several hours. The documents released on Friday 
by Congress included some details about the early days of Starr's 
inquiry into the Lewinsky matter. The documents said it was Ms. Goldberg 
who had steered Mrs. Tripp to Bennett. But Bakaly, the spokesman for 
Starr, said the information given to a lawyer in his office, whom 
he refused to identify, was ``vague'' and ``somewhat sketchy.'' ``This 
was just one friend calling another friend,'' Bakaly said. ``We get 
information from all kinds of sources. As far as we were concerned, 
we didn't get the information until the 12th, until Linda Tripp called.'' 
The early call to Starr's office from Marcus, and his involvement 
in the Jones case, were not disclosed by the independent counsel when 
Starr sought approval from the Justice Department in January to expand 
his investigation from Whitewater-related matters to include the Lewinsky 
matter. DOCUMENTS LINK JONES AND STARR CASES The role of link between 
the Jones and Starr cases as played by Mrs. Tripp is more clearly 
spelled out in the 4,600 pages of additional documents compiled by 
Starr and released by the House of Representatives on Friday. Another 
link is Michael Isikoff, a Newsweek investigative reporter who covered 
the Jones case and wrote the first comprehensive story about the Lewinsky 
investigation, and whose dealings with Starr's office is the subject 
of new and previously undisclosed dispute. Joseph Sandler, a Democratic 
Party lawyer, recently referred questions to a Federal judge about 
Isikoff's communications with Starr's office in mid-January, in the 
days before Starr's expanded inquiry became publicly known. Jordan, 
meanwhile, served as a logical bridge for Starr between the Whitewater 
inquiry and the Lewinsky case. The parallel was highlighted in Starr's 
impeachment report to Congress. ``The allegations with respect to 
Mr. Jordan and the job search were similar to ones already under review 
in the ongoing Whitewater investigation,'' Starr wrote. Later, lawyers 
for Clinton complained that the reference to the Clintons' failed 
Whitewater land deal was one of only two in the 455-page impeachment 
report. REPORTER DENIES URGING TRIPP TO MAKE TAPES In the newly released 
documents, and in interviews this week with principal participants 
in Starr's inquiry, Mrs. Tripp's role in prompting Starr's sex-and-perjury 
inquiry became clear: _ On Oct. 6, Mrs. Tripp met with Isikoff at 
a Washington apartment and offered to play for him audiotapes of her 
telephone conversations with Ms. Lewinsky. In an FBI interview with 
Mrs. Tripp last June, she said Isikoff had declined to listen to the 
tapes but ``suggested that Tripp make additional tapes.'' Both Isikoff 
and Ann McDaniel, Newsweek's Washington bureau chief, adamantly denied 
this week that the reporter had suggested Mrs. Tripp record additional 
tapes. _ In November, according to the documents released on Friday, 
Mrs. Tripp anonymously called lawyers for Mrs. Jones and told them 
about Ms. Lewinsky's relationship with the president. Both Mrs. Tripp 
and Ms. Lewinsky were subsequently subpoenaed in the Jones suit. _ 
Ms. Goldberg added that she also phoned Bennett some time in January 
to discuss Mrs. Tripp's accusations, but she refused to say when. 
Ms. Goldberg, who in 1972 was a Nixon campaign informer on George 
McGovern's presidential campaign plane, acknowledged that she relished 
her role as an instigator and source to Isikoff. ``It was cloak and 
dagger,'' she said with a laugh, ``like the old Nixon years.'' _ On 
Jan. 13, just a day after she called Starr's office, Mrs. Tripp wore 
an FBI wire and taped a conversation with Ms. Lewinsky. This was one 
day before Starr asked the Justice Department to expand his investigation. 
At the urging of the office of the independent counsel, Mrs. Tripp 
repeatedly steered the conversation with Ms. Lewinsky to Jordan. _ 
On Jan. 15, Isikoff was chasing the Lewinsky story for Newsweek. On 
that day, he went to Starr's office. What transpired at that meeting 
is the subject of still another controversy. Last month Sandler, the 
Democratic Party lawyer, raised questions about Isikoff's Jan. 15 
meeting with Starr's prosecutors in a letter to Judge Norma Holloway 
Johnson of U.S. District Court. Ms. Johnson has been investigating 
accusations that Starr's prosecutors leaked confidential information 
to the news media. The letter to Ms. Johnson, according to several 
Democratic lawyers who are familiar with its contents, recounts a 
conversation that Sandler said he had had with a limousine driver, 
Waverly Jenkins. Jenkins picked up Isikoff outside Starr's office 
on Jan. 15. According to Sandler's letter, Jenkins, who declined to 
be interviewed for this article, said he had overheard Isikoff making 
a telephone call from the car's backseat in which Isikoff said he 
had listened to tapes. Isikoff denied that such a conversation had 
taken place, denied listening to tapes in Starr's office and called 
Jenkins' account ``preposterous,'' ``Mike did make contact with Starr's 
office, as we reported in the magazine,'' added Ms. McDaniel, the 
Newsweek bureau chief. ``This was part of the normal course of his 
reporting. But a nanosecond of tape was never played for him.'' Lawyers 
in Starr's office also denied having played tapes or having provided 
Isikoff with confidential information. ``He didn't listen to any tapes,'' 
said Bakaly, the independent counsel's spokesman. ``We listened to 
him.'' Indeed, both Isikoff and Bakaly challenged several assertions 
made by the limousine driver. For example, the driver claimed that 
he had heard Isikoff say he was in the office for ``four or five hours.'' 
In fact, he was there for one hour, Isikoff and Bakaly said. TRIPP 
MET SECRETLY WITH JONES' LAWYERS Sandler, who became involved in the 
matter through a client, a Democratic consultant named Jennifer Lazlo, 
refused to discuss the matter except to say, ``I have referred it 
to the appropriate authorities.'' On the evening of Jan. 15, Starr's 
prosecutors told Justice Department lawyers that Isikoff's pursuit 
of the story created pressure for quickly expanding the Whitewater 
independent counsel's authority to investigate the Lewinsky matter. 
The next day, with approval to expand the investigation, Starr's team 
confronted Ms. Lewinsky in a failed attempt to win her cooperation. 
That night, on the eve of Clinton's deposition in the Jones case, 
Mrs. Tripp secretly met for hours with lawyers for Mrs. Jones and 
briefed them about Ms. Lewinsky. But Mrs. Tripp's secret meeting with 
the Jones team was cited by Clinton in his grand jury testimony. ``The 
news reports are that Linda Tripp talked to you, then went and talked 
with the Jones lawyers and, you know, that she prepared them for this,'' 
Clinton told prosecutors. He also said he was convinced that Mrs. 
Tripp had ``set me up.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>