<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After graduating from O'Connell High School last May, Billy Russell 
planned to go a community college and play football this fall. Instead, 
he is sitting at home with a diploma that is little more than a piece 
of paper in a nice red folder. Billy, 17, who was a special education 
student, said in a recent interview that he had been recruited to 
play football at O'Connell, a Roman Catholic school, with the promise 
of tutoring and financial assistance. ``The coach said if there would 
be less kids, it would be better for me and I can learn,'' Billy said 
in an interview recently. But the help never came, he said, and he 
failed most of his classes. Still, he and six other students who were 
athletes were allowed to graduate even though they lacked the necessary 
credits. It was only when Billy's mother, Catherine Russell, asked 
for her son's transcript last summer that she and her son learned 
that Billy should never have graduated. By that time, the school had 
released its principal, Thomas Ducote, and the football coach, Sam 
Zimmerle, and the diocese said it had taken steps to ensure that such 
a situation did not happen again. The Texas Association of Private 
and Parochial Schools has penalized O'Connell High School for several 
violations, including breaking recruiting rules, and Billy and his 
parents have retained a lawyer. ``This school cheated him for a year,'' 
said Charles Argento, the family lawyer. ``As far as I'm concerned 
they have to get him the tutors and I think they need to pay for it. 
They're using these kids. When football is done, they drop them.'' 
But others connected to the school say its problems go beyond an overemphasis 
on sports. ``High school football in Texas is out of hand,'' said 
Alan Slay, a retired telephone-company employee who taught computer 
science at the school last year. ``That is the top layer of the story. 
But move down a notch. O'Connell is a Catholic school not really equipped 
to handle a variety of students.'' In the past 10 years, the enrollment 
at O'Connell High School, grades 9 through 12, has dropped to 133 
students from about 300, and parents have been concerned that the 
diocese might close its doors. Teachers said academic standards had 
declined. And there was another problem. The school's bookkeeper, 
Cheryl Zimmerle, the wife of the football coach, committed suicide 
after the school's financial records were subpoenaed in connection 
with a fraud. ``Last year was the crowning of the bad times _ we had 
so many tragedies,'' said Pat Teltschik, who has taught at the school 
for 25 years. It was the only year that Ducote and Billy would be 
at O'Connell. Ducote, who had been a principal at a Roman Catholic 
school in Boca Raton, Fla., said he had taken the job at O'Connell 
to be closer to relatives. He is now unemployed. Billy said he had 
been recruited by Zimmerle while working out at a local college after 
returning from Rialto, Calif., in the summer of 1997. Billy, who played 
on the school's offensive and defensive lines, said he had been drawn 
to the school because of the promised academic help. ``I told them 
I wasn't no A-B student,'' Billy said. Mrs. Russell said that when 
she asked whether her son would be able to keep up at the school, 
she was assured by Zimmerle that Billy would be tutored. Mrs. Russell 
said the coach said he would take care of Billy's annual tuition of 
$4,250. Zimmerle, who is teaching and coaching football at Needville 
High School, declined to comment. Ducote said in a recent interview 
that by the end of Billy's first month in school, September 1997, 
teachers said of him: ``He can't read. He can't write. He can't spell. 
He can't do anything.'' Last October, Mrs. Zimmerle committed suicide 
after the school's financial records were sought in connection with 
a $1.3 million theft at Mrs. Zimmerle's previous place of employment. 
An audit after her death found about $300,000 in school money unaccounted 
for, diocese officials said. District Attorney Michael Gaurino said 
he had traced the missing $300,000 to Mrs. Zimmerle. He said his office 
had been unable ``to substantiate any evidence to charge anyone else.'' 
In January, after football season had ended, Mrs. Russell said she 
was called into the principal's office and told Billy was failing. 
Ducote said he told her, ``We're not meeting your child's need, and 
I think he needs to leave.'' He said Mrs. Russell became angry and 
threatened to sue the school if her son did not graduate. ``We couldn't 
afford a suit,'' Ducote said. So teachers continued to work with Billy 
as before. Patrick Danesi, a teacher and a football coach at O'Connell 
last year, was promoted to principal this year. Danesi said teachers 
modified work to help Billy understand; they read test questions to 
him and gave him longer to complete work. Melissa Musick, a counselor, 
said she had tried to get Billy into special education at a nearby 
public high school (O'Connell has no such program), but that could 
not be arranged, because he did not live in Galveston but in nearby 
Texas City. In May, with graduation at hand, Ducote said he had been 
confronted with what to do about 12 students who did not qualify to 
graduate out of a senior class of 48. In four cases, he said, students 
with failing grades, including two athletes, were given blank diplomas. 
Three other students, including one athlete, made arrangements to 
make up work to complete their credits. In four other cases, three 
of them involving athletes, Ducote said, he had gone against school 
policy and averaged first and second semester scores and allowed the 
students to graduate although they had failed the second semester. 
The 12th student, Billy, was given a diploma. ``I tried to make the 
best decision possible with the information I had at hand,'' Ducote 
said and added, speaking of the athletes, ``These children had been 
used and just cast aside.'' Danesi disputes Ducote's statement, saying 
that that all 12 students were given signed diplomas when none were 
eligible to graduate. O'Connell officials have appealed the sanctions 
by the Association of Private and Parochial Schools, which put the 
school on a one-year probation and barred its teams from going to 
district playoffs this year. ``It's unfair to the kids,'' Danesi said. 
``If you looked at all the schools in Galveston and Houston, you would 
find a lot of cases like it. We've been brought to light, and we're 
doing something about it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>