<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0086 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A massive, illuminated ``M'' burns nightly on a hillside here, a reminder 
that this town was founded by gold miners and is home to the Colorado 
School of Mines. For tourists, Golden celebrates its mining heritage 
with a geology museum and welcoming banners featuring a broad-hatted 
miner panning for gold. But this spring, Jeff Keller, president of 
a Golden paving company, committed the ultimate faux pas in the faux 
West. He asked to open a mine. No matter that an 8,789-foot mountain 
would block virtually all views of the isolated rock quarry, or that 
there would be no need for trucks because the Union Pacific railroad 
already sends 20 freight trains a day through his property. In the 
kind of battle waged routinely in the West today, neighbors from a 
subdivision two miles away are mobilizing to oppose the mine. Keller 
ignored an emerging truism of the new West: the only good miner is 
a dead miner, preferably a quaint one of the 19th century. Throughout 
the Colorado Rockies, mining tourism is a booming business, fueled 
by 12 mining museums, 13 tourist mines and about 400 mining-related 
sites on the state's Register of Historic Properties. Resort towns 
feature restaurants with folksy mining themes: The Gold Pan in Breckenridge, 
the Ore House in Steamboat Springs and the Motherlode in Aspen. But 
visitors should not confuse Western sentimentality over mining history 
with a love for modern mining. In Aspen, historically a mining town, 
Stefan Albouy, the last man who tried to mine silver, encountered 
continual local opposition until one day four years ago he climbed 
up to his mining property and killed himself with a shot to the head. 
In Utah, protests and a lawsuit erupted this summer when the Mormon 
Church asked Salt Lake County officials for permission to cut rock 
slabs from the same church-owned quarry that supplied granite a century 
ago for the Salt Lake Temple. The granite is for an enormous church 
assembly hall across the street from the temple. A U.S. District Court 
judge recently upheld the church's right to take rock from its quarry. 
In November, Montanans are to vote on a referendum to ban in future 
gold and silver mines the use of cyanide, which is commonly used in 
refining the metals. Battle after battle, the war on mining is taking 
its toll in the West, the nation's largest source of metals. Tired 
of mine permit applications that drag on for years without resolution, 
American mining companies spend 76 percent of their exploration budgets 
overseas, up from 40 percent in 1960. In 15 years, the number of American 
metal miners fell in half, hitting 51,000 in 1995. With more and more 
jobs going offshore, enrollments at the nation's mining schools have 
plummeted, to 1,040 today, from 3,070 two decades ago. At the mining 
school here, Theodore Bickart, the new president, announced last month 
a goal of overseas study for all mining students. Five years ago, 
the United States became a net importer of nonfuel minerals for the 
first time in modern memory. In the 1990s imports have jumped by one 
third, to $53 billion in 1996, from $40 billion in 1990. The United 
States is the most mineral-dependent society in the world, with each 
inhabitant consuming 20 tons of new metals a year. The impact is clearly 
seen in Montana, which has as its state motto ``oro y plata,'' Spanish 
for ``gold and silver,'' and which in 1995 produced $2.2 billion in 
minerals. But mining exploration investment has dropped to less than 
$300,000 a year today, from $17 million a year in 1989. ``I can tell 
you the mines that have closed, but I can't remember any that have 
opened,'' said Jill Andrews, executive director of the Montana Mining 
Association. Noting that Montana mining salaries average $43,000 a 
year, double the state industrial average, she added, ``Everybody 
I know is going to a third world country, to Russia, Chile, South 
Africa, mostly places where they don't get to take their families.'' 
Mining companies say the major obstacle is a state and federal regulatory 
process that can easily drag on for a decade. David Rovig, a Billings-based 
miner who is looking for gold in Colombia, said, ``Exploration used 
to be the riskiest part of the business _ now it is a distant second 
to permitting.'' ``These obstructionist groups want to shut down each 
and every mine,'' Rovig said, referring to environmental groups in 
Montana. Speaking on a day when he was negotiating the release of 
a Canadian employee taken hostage by Colombian guerrillas, he added: 
``At least down there, you can negotiate with the terrorists. Here 
you can't.'' Philip Burgess, president of the Center for the New West, 
said, ``We have got a culture where kids are brought up to think that 
only worms move dirt.'' This Denver-based study group reports that 
per-capita income growth in much of the West had not kept pace with 
the rest of the nation. Burgess added: ``We have replaced a lot of 
high paying jobs, many in mining, with low paying jobs in the tourism 
industry.'' Environmentalists counter their critics by saying that 
mechanization is the primary cause for the drop in employment and 
by noting that American nonfuel mineral production has actually increased 
during the 1990s, rising by 13 percent through 1996. In the West, 
they say, a legacy of polluting, abandoned mines has turned public 
opinion against new mines. ``The industry will say that this is yesterday's 
problem, but for many communities in the West, it is today's problem,'' 
said Stephen D'Esposito, president of the Mineral Policy Center, a 
Washington-based environmental group. He cited cases of mines abandoned 
this year because of low gold prices. Some Westerners argue that the 
modern value of the Rockies is in their surface scenery, not in their 
subterranean mineral wealth. Cities like Boise and Denver attract 
highly skilled workers and executives who are looking for scenery, 
not smelters. Thomas Power, a Montana economist, wrote recently, ``The 
open pit mine or clear-cut mountain top that once provided economic 
security for a community now threatens the influx of future jobs.'' 
As the Rockies have become the most highly urbanized part of the nation, 
much of the countryside has become a gentrified playground for city 
dwellers and suburbanites. ``Colorado has a love-hate relationship 
with mining,'' said Loretta Pineda, a state employee who recently 
held a seminar on mining tourism. ``Everybody is in love with the 
historical aspect of mining. But to get a new mining operation going, 
we run into a lot of opposition.'' Agreement came from Keller, who 
recently inspected his potential quarry site. After an empty freight 
train rumbled past, he said: ``The resource is there. The reason settlers 
came to Golden in the first place was for mining.'' But on the opposite 
side of Scar Top Mountain from the proposed quarry, historical arguments 
did not move David Waddington, whose family roots in Colorado go back 
140 years. Speaking from the Crescent Park subdivision, this retired 
solar engineer worried about dust, noise, fractured wells and disruption 
of bear and cougar habitats. ``There is a major rock climbing area 
below _ a blast could go off, a rock could hit a climber on the head,'' 
Waddington said. ``The sounds of the machinery running are going to 
be distressing to people who are there for recreation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>