<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0046 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Few peoples in the world have had as turbulent a past, or are as passionately 
attached to it, as the Armenians. Many of them believe they are alive 
today only because of their ancestors' near-fanatical insistence on 
preserving the ideas of the Armenian nation, church and language. 
History lends credence to this view. Armenians are from a region that 
has been successively dominated by great empires, among them the Mongol, 
Persian, Russian and Ottoman. They fiercely resisted assimilation, 
and were repeatedly called upon to defend themselves and their traditions. 
Often they were defeated at terrible cost. The great dream of generations 
of Armenians came true in 1991 when their land emerged from the wreckage 
of the Soviet Union as an independent state. As they savor their triumph, 
however, modern Armenians face a deep psychological challenge, one 
perhaps no less difficult than those posed by past enemies. The same 
ethnocentric nationalism that has allowed their nation to survive 
so long and triumph against such powerful odds is now out of fashion 
in the world. By clinging to it, the Armenians set themselves apart 
from the Europe they so much want to join. Memory of past outrages, 
especially the massacres perpetrated by Ottoman troops in 1915 as 
they chased Armenians out of ancestral homelands in eastern Anatolia, 
forms a prism through which many Armenians view the modern world. 
It makes them, like the Israelis, defiantly unwilling to compromise 
on issues they consider vital to their survival. One such issue is 
the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, which the world recognizes as part 
of neighboring Azerbaijan but which has been in the hands of its ethnic 
Armenian residents since 1994. Foreign diplomats assigned to help 
resolve the conflict want the enclave back under Azerbaijani control 
with as much autonomy as possible. But when President Levon Ter-Petrosian 
seemed ready to consider that formula earlier this year, he was promptly 
deposed in what amounted to a military coup. To give back even an 
inch of ``liberated'' land, many Armenians believe, would be tantamount 
to inviting a new slaughter. Their reading of history has taught them 
that the promises of outsiders are unreliable, that no one will rescue 
them in their hour of need, and that only they themselves can judge 
what their security requires. ``Nagorno-Karabakh is an ethnic homeland,'' 
said Karen Mirzoyan, who heads the enclave's office in Yerevan, the 
Armenian capital. ``It is quite unrealistic to think that we would 
subject ourselves to rule by Azerbaijan.'' Countries that dream of 
joining the European Union are supposed to renounce the idea of ethnic 
homelands and forego claims on land where their brethren live. Hungary's 
painful decision to renounce all claims on ethnically Hungarian regions 
of nearby countries, for example, paved the way for its invitation 
to join the Union. Here in Armenia, however, not even the prospect 
of membership would sway most people away from the patriotic fervor 
that has sustained them over millennia. In some European countries, 
it is considered highly insulting to accuse a politician of ``national 
thinking.'' This is linked with patterns of thought that have plunged 
the continent into countless wars. But in Armenia, national thinking 
is the dominant and almost all-inclusive ideology. ``Political leaders 
here are very careful to use the word `national,' said Mikael Danielyan, 
a human rights advocate. ``The Armenian mentality does not accept 
any ideas that it considers anti-national.'' Although there are nearly 
50 political parties in Armenia, none challenges the prevailing nationalist 
dogma. To do so, many Armenians believe, would be to expose their 
nation to mortal dangers. The nature of those dangers is on vivid 
display at the Genocide Museum here in the Armenian capital. Walls 
of the museum, which commemorates those who were killed in 1915, are 
covered with gruesome photographs that show starving, executed and 
beheaded Armenians. Whether they live here or abroad, many Armenians 
feel fated to carry one of history's heaviest burdens. Only a few 
groan under its weight. ``The main problem for Armenia is that we 
are very much concentrated on our past,'' said Michael Hambazdzumyan, 
22, a recent university graduate who is working to build a network 
of young people in the Caucasus that will press for regional cooperation. 
``Talk to an Armenian about Armenia, and you'll hear about the past,'' 
Hambazdzumyan said. ``We were the first nation to accept Christianity, 
we had an empire that touched three seas, we had monarchs who were 
related to Egyptian monarchs and European monarchs, we were the first 
nation to translate the Bible. Always `we were,' `we had.' The Armenian 
cares very much for the past and what we had, but not so much about 
what we have and want to have, and how we can reach that. ``Our history 
is presented to us as war, pain, killing, robbery,'' he added. ``We 
have only had 500 or 700 years of peace in 4,500 years of history. 
We learn this in school. We learn 2,500 dates of struggles, killings 
and betrayals. Maybe 10 or 20 or 30 of them speak about something 
positive. It is very heavy. It oppresses your psyche and mentality.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>