<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. troops patrolling Bosnia still run into a roadblock or an 
angry crowd every now and then. And even now they uncover illegal 
caches of weapons, as Company D, 2nd Battalion, 5th Regiment, did 
last week when it searched an aging Serb munitions plant in Bratunac. 
``This is a .50-caliber _ Russian,'' said 2nd Lt. Jason Lange, a lanky, 
tobacco-chewing weapons expert from the 1st Cavalry Division at Fort 
Hood, Texas, pointing out one rifle in a menacing row of them. ``The 
way it's fitted makes it an anti-aircraft weapon. That makes it a 
concern to us.'' By and large, though, patrols have become routine. 
Almost three years after the Dayton peace accords ended Bosnia's war 
in 1995, the U.S. and other NATO-led troops here have done what they 
were sent to do. They have separated the warring armies, stockpiled 
their arms, opened roads and rebuilt bridges, made it safer for the 
people of Bosnia to get on with their lives. What they have not yet 
done is to figure out how to leave. NATO's mission in Bosnia, originally 
scheduled to last only a year, has no end in sight. No one in the 
Clinton administration will say so flatly, for fear of angering an 
already irritated Congress, but the evidence is clear. NATO has broken 
ground on a new headquarters near Sarajevo. The United States is spending 
$34 million to buff up its camps, extending and resurfacing the runway 
at the air base that is U.S. headquarters in Tuzla and replacing sprawling 
tent cities with wood and tin buildings _ using a Vietnam-era design 
that can last 10 years. NATO has made no final decisions on the future 
size or shape of the force in Bosnia, known as the Stabilization Force, 
or SFOR. But the Army has already identified the division that is 
to take over the mission next fall: the 10th Mountain Division from 
Fort Drum, N.Y. And the unofficial word already circulating among 
troops here is that the Texas National Guard and units from Fort Carson, 
Colo., are supposed to replace THEM. As NATO contemplates air and 
missile strikes to stop Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's brutal 
crackdown in the Yugoslav province of Kosovo, the experience here 
underscores this fact: If the United States and NATO are going to 
intervene in the Balkans, they should expect to be there for a very 
long time. Even though Bosnia's war ended nearly three years ago, 
many central promises of the Dayton accords remain unfulfilled. Sarajevo's 
streets bustle with reconstruction and night life, but most of the 
country is economically listless. The unified government institutions 
envisioned at Dayton barely function _ and only then under the pressure 
of foreign envoys. Only a few refugees driven during the war from 
areas now dominated by ethnic rivals have been able, or willing, to 
return. The Clinton administration took heart in national elections 
three weeks ago that came and went without significant violence and 
in which several moderates won office. But the Bosnian Serbs chose 
an ardent nationalist, Nikola Poplasen, as their president, rejecting 
the candidate with Western backing. ``They do not want us here,'' 
said Sgt. Robert Jones, as he patrolled Zvornik, a Bosnian-Serb city 
hard on the Drina River, where posters of the Bosnian Serbs' wartime 
leader, Radovan Karadzic, a suspected war criminal, still hang in 
shop windows. ``You can tell by the look in their eyes.'' Yet very 
few here _ from soldiers to Bosnians themselves _ believe the U.S. 
and NATO troops can leave any time soon. NATO's supreme commander, 
Gen. Wesley Clark, said that the NATO forces had completed ``99 percent 
of the military tasks'' given to them. Yet he warned that there was 
``a very high risk of eventual outbreak of conflict'' if they dared 
go home. Echoing Defense Secretary William Cohen, who visited Sarajevo 
last weekend, Clark said the international organizations that saturate 
this country with an alphabet stew of acronyms now had to do more 
to carry out what he insisted are solely civilian or police matters. 
``NATO cannot do the civil implementation tasks for these international 
civilian authorities,'' he said in an interview. ``And they can't 
do them without our presence. That's the dilemma.'' He and others 
at the Pentagon have steadfastly resisted calls by the international 
organizations and some Clinton administration officials to broaden 
NATO's mandate, using its resources and power to do more, like chase 
suspected war criminals or escort refugees back to their former homes. 
In effect, NATO troops have become Bosnia's protectors, at once removed 
from the population and the only bulwark against renewed fighting. 
More than 60,000 heavily armed NATO troops poured into Bosnia just 
after the Dayton accords were signed in December 1995. Tensions have 
subsided since, and the force has dropped by half, to about 33,000, 
including 7,500 Americans _ a strong presence throughout Bosnia. In 
the northern sector controlled by the United States, U.S. troops roam 
every day in slow-moving convoys of armored Humvees. The United States 
still has tanks and Bradley fighting vehicles here, but they rarely 
leave base and only then to keep from getting rusty. At Camp Dobol, 
along the line of separation between the Serb and Muslim-Croat areas 
of Bosnia, as many as two dozen patrols rumble past the heavily fortified 
gates every day. The patrols have become so routine that the camp's 
commander, Lt. Col. Robert Brown of the 1st Cavalry Division from 
Fort Hood, said the biggest enemy facing the U.S. troops is complacency. 
``You have to stay ready,'' he said. Even though the war is long over, 
every soldier leaves the base armed and dressed in full combat gear, 
including a helmet and flak vest, underscoring the Pentagon's overarching 
concern about casualties. Since the bombings of the U.S. embassies 
in East Africa and the U.S. retaliation against those believed to 
be behind them, soldiers have had to wear the gear even on base. Capt. 
Scott Roberts, who led a recent patrol of Humvees from Company B, 
2nd Battalion, 8th Regiment, said his particular missions usually 
had one objective: letting the Serbs know that NATO was around. Often 
the patrols amount to little more than a drive around, but Captain 
Roberts' company clambered out of their Humvees in Zvornik and wandered 
into the city, which was ethnically mixed before the Serbs drove out 
Muslims at the start of the war in 1992. Under leery, if not hostile, 
gazes, he stopped at an empty lot, all that remains of Zvornik's mosque. 
From Zvornik, the patrol wound through the Lukovina Valley, passing 
ghostly villages where every house was reduced to charred ruins. At 
Sutanovici, a formerly Muslim town now utterly deserted, Roberts stopped 
to question Serbs collecting wood for the coming winter. His lieutenant, 
David Nelson, jotted down their license-plate numbers. The point, 
Roberts said, was to learn if they knew of anyone trying to return 
to the village, something that could easily inflame tensions. But 
the exchange underscored the limits of NATO's military mission. One 
of the Serbs, Milos Jerkic, said he used to live in a suburb of Sarajevo, 
but had to leave after Dayton awarded that territory to the Muslim-Croat 
Federation. What he wants most is to go home. ``I used to have a store 
there,'' he said. ``Now I am chopping wood.'' The captain told him 
that resettlement is not NATO's job. Others say NATO can and should 
do more. Maj. James Morgan, a marine assigned to the civil-affairs 
unit at the U.S. headquarters in Tuzla, said the Americans should 
shed combat gear _ the troops, he said, are ``all turtled up'' _ and, 
like most of the other NATO troops here, have more contact with the 
Bosnians themselves, Serb, Croat or Muslim. He said they should act 
more like community police officers back home, walking instead of 
patrolling from Humvees. ``We've got too many combat soldiers out 
here,'' Morgan said as he drove a Humvee to Olovo, where he met with 
local officials. ``If we're ever going to implement the Dayton accords, 
we need to get SFOR more involved.'' Whatever NATO's exact role, few 
doubt its necessity. An entire company from Camp Demi, which the troops 
like to say was named after the actress Demi Moore, was dispatched 
the other day to guard investigators from the war-crimes tribunal 
in The Hague as they began excavating a mass grave in mountains south 
of Srebrenica, where as many as 7,000 Muslim men and boys are believed 
to have been massacred in July 1995. ``The people who did this are 
still running around,'' said Steve Gardner, head of the tribunal's 
forensics team in Bosnia. When his team finished its work, a convoy 
escorted them back through Serb-held territory, a three-hour journey. 
Another platoon of 30 soldiers set up camp near the grave site, where 
they will stay until the work is done. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>