<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0161 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Almost exactly 25 years have passed since Richard Nixon nominated 
me to replace the disgraced Spiro Agnew as vice president. In the 
contentious days of autumn 1973, my confirmation was by no means assured. 
Indeed, a small group of House Democrats, led by Bella Abzug, risked 
a constitutional crisis in order to pursue their own agenda. ``We 
can get control and keep control,'' Ms. Abzug told the speaker of 
the House, Carl Albert. The group hoped, eventually, to replace Nixon 
himself with Albert. The speaker, true to form, refused to have anything 
to do with the scheme. And so on Dec. 6, 1973, the House voted 387-35 
to confirm my nomination in accordance with the 25th Amendment to 
the Constitution. When I succeeded to the presidency, in August 1974, 
my immediate and overriding priority was to draw off the poison that 
had seeped into the nation's bloodstream during two years of scandal 
and sometimes ugly partisanship. Some Americans have yet to forgive 
me for pardoning my predecessor. In the days leading up to that hugely 
controversial action, I didn't take a poll for guidance, but I did 
say more than a few prayers. In the end I listened to only one voice, 
that of my conscience. I didn't issue the pardon for Nixon's sake, 
but for the country's. A generation later, Americans once again confront 
the specter of impeachment. From the day, last January, that the Monica 
Lewinsky story first came to light, I have refrained publicly from 
making any substantive comments. I have done so because I haven't 
known enough of the facts _ and because I know all too well that a 
president's responsibilities are, at the best of times, onerous. In 
common with the other former presidents, I have had no wish to increase 
those burdens. Moreover, I resolved to say nothing unless my words 
added constructively to the national discussion. This much now seems 
clear: whether or not President Clinton has broken any laws, he has 
broken faith with those who elected him. A leader of rare gifts, one 
who set out to change history by convincing the electorate that he 
and his party wore the mantle of individual responsibility and personal 
accountability, the president has since been forced to take refuge 
in legalistic evasions, while his defenders resort to the insulting 
mantra that ``everybody does it.'' The best evidence that everybody 
doesn't do it is the genuine outrage occasioned by the president's 
conduct and by the efforts of some White House surrogates to minimize 
its significance or savage his critics. The question confronting us, 
then, is not whether the president has done wrong, but rather, what 
is an appropriate form of punishment for his wrongdoing. A simple 
apology is inadequate, and a fine would trivialize his misconduct 
by treating it as a mere question of monetary restitution. At the 
same time, the president is not the only one who stands before the 
bar of judgment. It has been said that Washington is a town of marble 
and mud. Often in these past few months it has seemed that we were 
all in danger of sinking into the mire. Twenty-five years after leaving 
it, I still consider myself a man of the House. I never forget that 
my elevation to the presidency came about through congressional as 
well as constitutional mandate. My years in the White House were devoted 
to restoring public confidence in institutions of popular governance. 
Now as then, I care more about preserving respect for those institutions 
than I do about the fate of any individual temporarily entrusted with 
office. This is why I think the time has come to pause and consider 
the long-term consequences of removing this president from office 
based on the evidence at hand. The president's hairsplitting legalisms, 
objectionable as they may be, are but the foretaste of a protracted 
and increasingly divisive debate over those deliberately imprecise 
words ``high crimes and misdemeanors.'' The Framers, after all, dealt 
in eternal truths, not glossy deceit. Moving with dispatch, the House 
Judiciary Committee should be able to conclude a preliminary inquiry 
into possible grounds for impeachment before the end of the year. 
Once that process is completed, and barring unexpected new revelations, 
the full House might then consider the following resolution to the 
crisis. Each year it is customary for a president to journey down 
Pennsylvania Avenue and appear before a joint session of Congress 
to deliver his State of the Union address. One of the binding rituals 
of our democracy, it takes on added grandeur from its surroundings 
_ there, in that chamber where so much of the American story has been 
written, and where the ghosts of Woodrow Wilson, Franklin Roosevelt 
and Dwight Eisenhower call succeeding generations to account. Imagine 
a very different kind of presidential appearance in the closing days 
of this year, not at the rostrum familiar to viewers from moments 
of triumph, but in the well of the House. Imagine a president receiving 
not an ovation from the people's representatives, but a harshly worded 
rebuke as rendered by members of both parties. I emphasize: this would 
be a rebuke, not a rebuttal by the president. On the contrary, by 
his appearance the president would accept full responsibility for 
his actions, as well as for his subsequent efforts to delay or impede 
the investigation of them. No spinning, no semantics, no evasiveness 
or blaming others for his plight. Let all this be done without partisan 
exploitation or mean-spiritedness. Let it be dignified, honest and, 
above all, cleansing. The result, I believe, would be the first moment 
of majesty in an otherwise squalid year. Anyone who confuses this 
scenario with a slap on the wrist, or a censure written in disappearing 
ink, underestimates the historic impact of such a pronouncement. Nor 
should anyone forget the power of television to foster indelible images 
in the national memory _ not unlike what happened on the solemn August 
noontime in 1974 when I stood in the East Room and declared our long 
national nightmare to be over. At 85, I have no personal or political 
agenda, nor do I have any interest in ``rescuing'' Bill Clinton. But 
I do care, passionately, about rescuing the country I love from further 
turmoil or uncertainty. More than a way out of the current mess, most 
Americans want a way up to something better. In the midst of a far 
graver national crisis, Lincoln observed, ``The occasion is piled 
high with difficulty, and we must rise with the occasion.'' We should 
remember those words in the days ahead. Better yet, we should be guided 
by them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>