<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0048 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thirty years ago, soldiers and policemen crushed Mexico's first major 
pro-democracy movement with a massacre of demonstrators that is often 
likened here to the Tiananmen Square massacre in China. Ever since, 
successive authoritarian governments have stuck to an official history 
that blames the middle-class demonstrators who were its main victims 
for the violence. Each year since, in the face of that official line, 
relatives of the victims would commemorate the events of Oct. 2, 1968, 
by holding candles at Tlatelolco Plaza, the massacre site, and mourning 
their loved ones in timid silence, almost furtively. But this year 
was different, because the student demonstrators of 1968 are now in 
their 50s, and a number of them last year helped wrest control of 
the Congress and city government from the authoritarian party that 
has governed for seven decades. So this year, the anniversary was 
declared an official day of mourning, with the demonstrators who died 
honored as revolutionary heroes. ``This is a triumph of free expression 
over authoritarianism, of the Mexican people's version of history 
over the government's version,''` said Carlos Monsivais, a prominent 
intellectual. It is also the most dramatic example of a historical 
revisionism that can be expected to accompany the effective collapse 
of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, as Mexico's single 
effective party. Countries all across Latin America, passing from 
dictatorship to democracy, have seen similar quests for historical 
truth about abuses under previous regimes. Argentina and Chile, notably, 
have set up ``truth commissions'' to help victims come to terms with 
their suffering, even though their fragile democracies cannot bring 
to justice the generals and others who ordered the atrocities. Mexico 
is a bit different, because abuses like Tlatelolco occurred under 
a constitutional regime, however authoritarian, rather than a dictatorship. 
And the search for truth has begun while the transition to full democracy 
is still incomplete; Mexico's executive branch remains in PRI hands. 
If and when the opposition finally wins the presidency, the clamor 
will doubtless increase to expose other secrets, about other massacres 
or election fraud, for example. Still, enough has emerged to give 
a clear hint of how different Mexican history may one day appear to 
Mexicans. The 1968 movement, which began among students,had spread 
to the middle class when, on Oct. 2, thousands of demonstrators were 
surrounded by security forces who opened fire from tanks and helicopters. 
Rivers of blood soon ran in the plaza, and 2,000 demonstrators were 
beaten and jailed. Recent revelations show that President Gustavo 
Diaz Ordaz orchestrated the bloodshed because he feared embarrassment 
by protests when Mexico City hosted the Olympics that month, and that 
his government went to great lengths to conceal his part. The official 
story also said that students, supposedly inflamed by foreign agitators, 
fired on the army. In diplomatic cables at the time, American embassy 
officials estimated that at least 200 people had been killed. Mexico's 
government said only 27 died. Now, six books on Tlatelolco are scheduled 
for publication this year; in one, the author, Sergio Aguayo, details 
how successive governments pressured opinion makers and public servants 
to repeat the official line. The police, for example, closed one magazine 
that defied the government in 1968, and several Mexican diplomats 
were fired for voicing doubts in private about the official story. 
For years, the only serious alternative version of events came from 
a collection of interviews with survivors, ``The Night of Tlatelolco,'' 
(Ediciones Era), which the author, Elena Poniatowska, could not get 
published until Daz left office in 1970. But this year, university 
researchers and investigative reporters were able to sift through 
government archives, and found a 1968 letter that demonstrates how 
some publishers parroted the government line voluntarily. In it, the 
obsequious publisher of a Mexico City daily, El Heraldo, writes to 
Diaz: ``No one has ever been able to say that I have not acted with 
open partiality toward your government.'' Other countries cooperated 
too. Washington never publicly expressed concern. And recently declassified 
American documents collected by the private, Washington-based National 
Security Archives included an FBI report arguing that a Trotskyist 
``shock group'' had fired on troops at Tlatelolco. That was an absurd 
claim; the ``shock group'' was a plainclothes army unit. The research 
here became possible after opposition leaders forced the declassification 
of thousands of documents. But the government is still stonewalling 
on defense ministry records and footage of the massacre. ``The complete 
truth is still out of reach, because the powers of the opposition 
are limited,'' said Gustavo Espinosa Plata, who in 1968 witnessed 
the atrocities and now presides over a congressional investigating 
committee. ``We'll wait until we take control of the entire government. 
Then we'll really lay bare the system.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>