<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you wanted to send a message to a bunch of aliens in outer space, 
how could you be sure they would understand it? Would you make the 
message rich in the opaque minutia of modern science and write it 
in code? Would you assume that beings from other planets are more 
intelligent _ much more intelligent? In 1974, Frank Drake composed 
such a missive in binary code and, unsure of its readability, bounced 
it off just one earthling. But the clever subject was no ordinary 
mortal. He was Carl Sagan, the astronomer and science popularizer 
who died two years ago. He took the test in 1974 over lunch at the 
Cornell University faculty club, and he passed with flying colors. 
``I'd give him an A,'' Drake, now a professor emeritus of astronomy 
and astrophysics at the University of California at Santa Cruz, said 
last week. ``He got all the message very quickly except for one group 
of characters. And once I helped him with that, he got the rest right 
away. I think if he had taken it home or back to his office, he would 
have gotten the whole thing.'' But Drake acknowledges that most ordinary 
earthlings would be baffled by the message. And whether extraterrestrials 
would get it is anyone's guess. A few weeks after the Sagan quiz, 
Drake had the message beamed from the Arecibo observatory in Puerto 
Rico toward M13, a dense cluster of hundreds of thousands of old stars 
orbiting the fringes of the Milky Way. The federal government pulled 
the plug on the search for alien life in 1993, but scientists financed 
with private donations returned to Arecibo last month to renew their 
search. There has been no answer to the long-ago message. Sagan, a 
pioneer in trying to communicate with aliens, had his own ideas about 
space talk that relied heavily on drawings. With Drake's help, Sagan 
designed the messages that went on the Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11 space 
probes, which were destined to zoom out of the solar system, perhaps 
eventually to the farthest reaches of the galaxy. Sagan's drawings, 
etched on a small plaque, were easy to understand _ if you happened 
to have human-like eyeballs. The pictures showed a naked man and woman 
standing in front of the Pioneer spacecraft. Nearby was a diagram 
of the solar system and the probe zooming away from the third planet. 
Harder to get were a galactic map showing the Sun's location and a 
picture of a hydrogen atom, whose radiating wavelength (8.3 inches) 
was the key to map distances. In contrast, Drake's missive was blasted 
through space on a simple beam of radio waves. His binary format, 
the simplest of codes, made the message as intelligible as possible. 
In theory, radio waves would spread far more broadly through space 
than Sagan's plaque would travel, and have a better chance of reaching 
an audience. Assuming, of course, that human bias and hubris had not 
rendered the whole enterprise futile from the start. In 1974, when 
Drake was director of Arecibo, the world's largest radiotelescope, 
250 guests and speakers who had assembled in the damp heat of the 
Puerto Rican jungle heard the binary message over a loudspeaker as 
the radio waves sped upwards. For slightly more than three minutes, 
the sound filled the air, trilling back and forth between the two 
tones of the binary code. To some participants it seemed a sad song 
full of yearning, even if its underlying message was indecipherable. 
``On that hot afternoon in the tropics, I saw women in sleeveless 
dresses rub chills from their arms,'' Drake recalled. ``I saw the 
eyes of sober scientists fill with tears.'' Today, the cipher is still 
zooming outward. At the speed of light, it will reach M13 in about 
21,000 years. A reply from any aliens who happen to be listening in 
as the signal passes will presumably take a similarly long time. Decoding 
the message, Drake conceded, would take ``all the great minds'' of 
an alien race. ``Even if it is not all deciphered, they'd get the 
message,'' he said. ``It's the same with any message we receive. Just 
the existence of such a message would be a bombshell'' because it 
would prove the existence of extraterrestrials. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>