<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kevin Murphy counts himself as one of the Downtown Athletic Club's 
biggest fans, so he seemed a little embarrassed that he was the only 
person shooting hoops in the cavernous indoor basketball court before 
lunch one recent weekday. It is hard to believe, he said, ``but when 
I first joined the club, there was a waiting list and 4,000 members.'' 
That was back in 1976, and since then the place itself has not changed 
much. An odd combination of gentlemen's club and gymnasium, it remains 
to this day one of the few spots in the city where a member can play 
a fierce game of squash, simmer in the steam room, take a cold plunge, 
shoot a round of billiards, eat a chicken pot pie and cap it all off 
with a Scotch and cigar at what may be New York's longest bar. (It 
is more than 70 feet long.) But fewer and fewer people seem interested 
in doing all these things, at least under one roof. That helps explain 
how the Downtown Athletic Club, home of college football's Heisman 
Trophy, finds itself in dire straits. Membership is dwindling, to 
under 1,300. The building, at 19 West St. near the tip of lower Manhattan, 
is crumbling. And the club's financial affairs are in utter disarray. 
(It is in bankruptcy and owes the city more than $3 million in back 
taxes.) To pay off its back taxes without hocking the Heisman, the 
club is trying to find a way to use its other asset, its building, 
which dates to 1930. But a series of nasty disputes has broken out, 
pitting members against a group of real estate developers who sought 
to buy and renovate the building, and, most recently, against the 
city's Landmarks Preservation Commission, which wants to preserve 
the Art Deco exterior of the club's 35-story building. That desire 
may stymie another developer's effort to upgrade the building and 
rescue the club. Like so many New York battles, this one is over real 
estate. But it is also a fight for the soul of an old-fashioned institution 
that some people believe has outlived its time. ``We tried to work 
with them to allow the club and its heritage to go forward, to bring 
the facility into the 21st century so it could be enjoyed by a lot 
more people,'' said M. James Spitzer, the lawyer for the real estate 
developers who tried to buy the club's building and now hold the mortgage 
on it. But the members ``all know each other _ the few that use it 
_ and don't want anyone else in there.'' The members don't see it 
quite that way. ``Why shouldn't we keep something that has made important 
contributions to the city for 50 years?'' asked William Dockery, who, 
as the club's new president, is quarterbacking its latest effort to 
stave off oblivion. The developers, Dockery contended, ``want to change 
the entire fabric of the place, and make it like the Equinox or the 
Vertical, a froufrou club with several thousand members.'' ``Froufrou'' 
is not a word anyone would use to describe the Downtown Athletic Club. 
Masculine, yes. Impressive, perhaps. Empty, often. True, there is 
a jazzy floor full of stationary bikes and Stairmasters, where televisions 
are tuned to CNBC, music blares and mirrors glare, just like at most 
health clubs. But that floor seems almost jarringly out of place in 
a building where time seems to have stopped decades ago. On the 18th 
floor is a big boxing ring, where former heavyweight boxer Gerry Cooney 
gives lessons some afternoons _ and where some of the plaster has 
fallen from the high ceiling. The 12th floor is given over to an Olympic-size 
swimming pool, with a balcony from which viewers can watch the slow 
strokes of the half-dozen swimmers below. The top floors of the building, 
full of small rooms that members and outsiders can rent by the day, 
week or month, are generous with their harbor views but stingy with 
their bathrooms, which have stall showers, just like college. On the 
sixth floor, ``The locker rooms are kind of grubby, but frankly, I 
don't care,'' said Byron Klapper, a bond-insurance executive who has 
been a club member for almost 20 years. He boasts that Ivan Boesky, 
one of Wall Street's most famous felons in the 1980s, had the locker 
a few doors down. On the fifth floor is the women's locker room, which 
can best be described as pink. The club was one of the first of Manhattan's 
men's clubs to admit women, which it did in the late 1970s. About 
10 percent of the members are women. This early effort to increase 
membership had mixed results, Murphy recalled. ``One hundred women 
joined _ but 75 old-timers, the guys who like to smoke cigars and 
play dominoes, resigned,'' he said. In general, change has come hard 
for the club. Luigi D'Angelo, who has worked there for 36 years, and 
now oversees the food service, said that the members who eat there 
would be disappointed if they could not get their corned beef and 
cabbage every Wednesday, followed by corned beef hash every Thursday. 
Where else would the dining room include three billiard tables at 
one end? What other place has anything like the Heisman Room, a wood-paneled 
retreat covered with portraits of famous football players? What other 
place has the fabled trophy, a bronze statue of a football player 
stiff-arming his way to victory, which has been awarded to the best 
college player in the country every year since 1935? And if the carpet 
in the lobby where the Heisman stands is a little threadbare, so what? 
Still, almost all private clubs in cities across the country ran into 
trouble in the early 1990s. ``When Congress took away the club-dues 
tax deduction, that particularly hurt city clubs,'' said Elizabeth 
Hart, a vice president of the National Club Association in Washington. 
``Instead of sending six executives to join a club, companies might 
only send two.'' The Downtown Athletic Club also faced special problems 
of its own. Many of its members worked at stock brokerage firms and 
investment banks that merged out of existence or moved uptown. Shipping 
concerns started leaving lower Manhattan in favor of New Jersey, and 
law firms dispersed all over the city. Oddly, perhaps, New Yorkers' 
increasing interest in healthy living also hurt the club. For one 
thing, a member who drinks a three-martini lunch is far more profitable 
for the club than a member who spends an hour playing pickup basketball. 
For another, spandex-clad single people have increasingly preferred 
to go to clubs where they could meet other spandex-clad single people, 
places like health clubs. These usually cost far less that the athletic 
club's $1,800 annual membership. In the early 1990s, the club's financial 
situation became increasingly desperate. First the club fell behind 
on its real estate taxes, then it had to pledge some of the revenues 
it gets from the Heisman trophy to satisfy the bank that held its 
mortgage. By the end of 1996, things were so dire that the club's 
accountants expressed concern about whether it could stay in business. 
Last year, the club's directors devised a plan to sell the club's 
building to developers led by Richard Born, a well-known hotelier 
who owns the Stanhope, and Steven Caspi, a Westchester developer. 
The developers planned to renovate the building, operate a hotel on 
the top floors, and lease space back to the club. But the club's members 
voted against the plan. The club's lawyers say the deal was not good 
enough, financially. The developers' lawyers say a new board of directors 
at the club tried to scotch the deal because they feared losing control 
of their private preserve. In any event, the developers did not give 
up. They sued the club to try to get it to go ahead with the deal. 
And last February, they bought the club's mortgage from the Bank of 
New York, after the club itself was unable to come up with the $5 
million that the bank wanted. That is when the club filed for bankruptcy 
protection, in part over worries that the developers might foreclose 
on the mortgage. Throughout all this, many club members have remained 
blissfully unaware of the institution's peril. But others, like Dockery, 
were galvanized. ``I didn't want to get involved _ I was happy working 
on my hook shot,'' he said. ``But I saw the club headed down the drain.'' 
Elected in May, Dockery and his fellow directors began trying to clean 
up the club's rather chaotic accounting and operating practices in 
the hope of finding a new deal that would provide enough cash to pay 
off the city's $3 million tax lien. By August, they thought they had 
found it. Centaur Properties tentatively agreed to lease the top floors 
of the building for close to $1 million a year, and spend more than 
$12 million to turn the dormlike rooms into suites that corporations 
could rent for long-term stays. Centaur would also pay the club $7 
million in cash up front so that renters could use the club's athletic 
equipment; that money would let the club pay the city and spruce up 
its building. Almost immediately, however, a snag arose. The city 
government had been warning the club for some time that it planned 
to consider designating the club's exterior a landmark; now, it proposed 
holding a hearing on the matter in September. This did not go over 
well with Centaur, which complained that such a designation would 
add at least $1 million to its costs and untold time to its development 
plans. In particular, the developer plans to punch holes in the exterior 
walls to put in air conditioners; much of the building's Art Deco 
detailing occurs under the windows, just where such holes would be 
likely to go. Even if the Centaur plan goes forward, it is unclear 
whether the developers who hold the mortgage would be satisfied. They 
could declare the club in default if it does not meet certain financial 
targets _ even if it makes all its payments on time. Dockery spent 
last week holding meetings with members to discuss the plan to save 
their club. All seemed receptive, he said. He has a lot of members 
rooting for him, including members like Robin Segal, who comes down 
from Greenwich Village to exercise at the club. ``My family has been 
members here for years,'' she said, adding that this is a place her 
teen-aged children learned to love sports. ``I hope they pull it off,'' 
she said of the plan. ``It's a shame _ there's so much tradition here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>