<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0219 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Darryl Strawberry, the 36-year-old Yankees outfielder, underwent what 
doctors said was a successful and uncomplicated three-hour operation 
to remove a cancer of his colon Saturday. The surgical team at Columbia-Presbyterian 
Medical Center in Manhattan, headed by Dr. George J. Todd, said it 
removed a cancerous tumor that measured 2.4 inches in length and that 
nearly blocked his intestine. There was no visible evidence during 
the operation that the cancer had spread beyond that area of the bowel, 
the doctors said in a statement issued Saturday night. But it will 
be about a week before the results of the key pathology tests are 
available. The findings will determine what anti-cancer therapy the 
doctors will recommend for Strawberry after he recuperates from surgery. 
He was expected to stay in the hospital for one week. The pathology 
findings will provide the doctors with information they need to stage, 
or classify, the severity of Strawberry's cancer and provide a statistical 
base for a long-term prognosis. Although Strawberry's wife, Charisse, 
had said the cancer was a favorable stage A or B, cancer experts said 
in interviews that there was no way to know the stage of the cancer 
until the final pathology tests were available. The results of the 
pathologist's examination of the cancerous tumor and the other tissues 
removed are generally considered more important than the size of the 
cancer. The doctors' statement that the tumor nearly obstructed the 
intestine would be a likely explanation for the abdominal cramping 
Strawberry had experienced in recent weeks. Abdominal pain is not 
a usual symptom of an early colon cancer. The operation went smoothly, 
the doctors said, and afterward Strawberry was resting comfortably 
with his family at his side. The cancer was located in the area of 
the large intestine known as the descending colon. After removing 
a 16-inch portion of bowel containing the cancer and the segment of 
normal colon to either side of it, the surgeons sewed the severed 
ends of the colon together. As expected, the surgeons did not need 
to create a new opening through the abdomen, known as a colostomy, 
to eliminate wastes from the bowel. An ultrasound test performed during 
the operation showed no evidence of spread of the cancer to the liver, 
the doctors said. During the next week, pathologists will add fixatives 
and chemical dyes to the removed cancer and tissues to make it easier 
to examine under a microscope. By looking through a microscope, the 
pathologists can detect cancerous cells that would not be visible 
to the naked eye. Because several steps are involved in the preparation 
of the tissues, and it takes time for the fixatives and chemicals 
to act, it usually is about a week before such pathology tests can 
be completed. Throughout the day fans stopped by Columbia-Presbyterian 
to check on Strawberry's condition. Millie Casanova, 34, drove in 
from Ringwood, N.J., with her two children, Andrew, 10, and Kelly, 
12. Casanova described herself as a diehard Strawberry and Yankees 
fan. ``Darryl's whole life has been baseball,'' Casanova said. ``He's 
been a great asset to the Yankees.'' Todd, a specialist in surgery 
of blood vessels, was assisted in the operation by Dr. Alan Benvenisty, 
Dr. John A. Chabot, Dr. Kenneth A. Forde and Dr. Richard L. Whelan. 
Dr. Steve Mercer was the anesthesiologist, and Jeanette Hofman and 
Kim Vanbeverhaut were the nurses. Dr. Stuart Hershon, a specialist 
in bone and joint surgery and the Yankees' team physician, was also 
present. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>