<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0049 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Different reports, different eras, same subject: race. Issued 30 years 
apart, the famous 1968 Kerner Commission study on race and the newly 
issued report of President Clinton's advisory board on race are a 
study in contrasts. The Kerner report, named for its chairman, Otto 
Kerner, former governor of Illinois, was replete with dire warnings. 
It said the country was becoming ``two societies, one black, one white 
_ separate and unequal.'' And it called for urgent government action 
_ including hefty spending and, if necessary, tax increases _ to address 
the problems of America's ghettos. The other, issued last month by 
a seven-member panel led by the historian John Hope Franklin, is by 
many accounts a pallid monograph. Its major recommendation is for 
a presidential council on racial disparities. Clinton officials say 
comparisons are unfair: The Kerner Commission was an independent body, 
while the Clinton board was little more than an extension of the White 
House, charged mainly with taking the country's racial temperature. 
Probably a more telling explanation lies in the eras the two bodies 
conducted their work. The Kerner Commission began its work in 1967, 
a time of catastrophic race riots in Newark, Detroit and scores of 
other cities. A sense of urgency, if not national panic, reigned. 
In contrast, Franklin's panel worked during a time of relative racial 
peace, marked by dramatic improvements in the status of blacks (some 
the result of policies advocated by the Kerner Commission) and public 
skepticism of government programs and spending. The contrasting reports 
_ excerpted below (with subheadings added for emphasis) _ can be seen 
as bookends for an era of activism followed by confusion over what 
to do next. Then: Attack the Problem The only genuine, long-range 
solution from what has happened lies in attack _mounted at every level 
_ upon the conditions that breed despair and violence. All of us know 
what those conditions are: ignorance, discrimination, slums, poverty, 
disease, not enough jobs. We should attack these conditions _ not 
because we are frightened by conflict, but because we are fired by 
conscience. _ Opening statement by President Lyndon B. Johnson, July 
27, 1967 Now: Let's Keep Working On It Today, I ask the American people 
to join me in a great national effort to perfect the promise of America 
for this new time as we seek to build our more perfect union ... That 
is the unfinished work of our time, to lift the burden of race and 
redeem the promise of America. _ Opening statement by President Clinton, 
June 14, 1997 Then: Divided We Fall To pursue our present course will 
involve the continuing polarization of the American community and, 
ultimately, the destruction of basic American values. _ Introduction 
to Kerner report Now: United We Stand Throughout the year, the Board 
heard stories and shared experiences that reinforced their belief 
that we are a country whose citizens are more united than divided. 
All too often, however, racial differences and discrimination obstruct 
our ability to move beyond race and color to recognize our common 
values. _Introduction to Clinton report Then: The Aim Was `Visible 
Progress' It is time to adopt strategies for action that will produce 
quick and visible progress. It is time to make good the promises of 
American democracy to all citizens _ urban and rural, white and black, 
Spanish-surname, American Indian and every minority group. _Kerner 
introduction Now: The Aim Is `Dialogue' The Board struggled with the 
fact that there currently does not exist a language or vocabulary 
that respects differences of opinion and experience that often materialize 
during conversations about race and racism in this country. The absence 
of such a language created tensions and opportunities to expand the 
dialogue. _Clinton board's introduction Then: Integrate the Schools 
We support integration as the priority education strategy because 
it is essential to the future of American society ... It is indispensable 
that opportunities for integration between the races be expanded. 
_Kerner Commission Now: Hey, That Was a Good Idea Emerging evidence 
shows that diversity in the education context, including racial diversity 
is essential to provide all students with a complete educational experience. 
To varying degrees in the K-12 and higher education contexts, diversity 
can promote many benefits that accrue to all students and society. 
_Clinton board Then: The News Media Are Out to Lunch By and large, 
news organizations have failed to communicate to both their black 
and white audiences a sense of the problems America faces and the 
sources of potential solutions. The media report and write from the 
standpoint of a white man's world. The ills of the ghetto, the difficulties 
of life there, the Negro's burning sense of grievance, are seldom 
conveyed. _Kerner Commission Now: What Media? _The Clinton advisory 
board did not discuss the media. Then: Subsidize Millions of New Homes 
In our view the dimension of the need calls for an unprecedented national 
effort. We believe that the nation's housing programs must be expanded 
to bring within the reach of low and moderate income families 600,000 
new and existing units next year and 6 million units over the next 
five years. _Kerner Commission Now: Segregation Is Regrettable Many 
poor minority residents live in segregated, isolated and stigmatized 
neighborhoods. Racial segregation, limited job opportunities, and 
discrimination continue to serve as a basis for persistent minority 
poverty. As a result, efforts to remove these barriers to prosperity 
are important, although not easy, and will require commitment from 
government, business, the nonprofit community and local communities. 
_Clinton board 
</TEXT>
</DOC>