<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981003.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Yankees gathered in the hotel lobby here Saturday morning, ready 
to travel, with manager Joe Torre and the others looking surprisingly 
refreshed considering the ordeal they went through to finish their 
division series sweep of the Texas Rangers. They waited through a 
3-hour-16-minute rain delay to beat the Rangers, 4-0, in Game 3 of 
the three-of-five-game series, a game that ended at 2:26 a.m. New 
York time. David Cone allowed just two hits over five and two-thirds 
innings, and Paul O'Neill and Shane Spencer each hit home runs to 
account for the scoring. The Yankees returned to New York, where many 
will visit the ailing Darryl Strawberry before beginning the American 
League Championship Series against either Cleveland or Boston on Tuesday 
night at Yankee Stadium. The Yankees have won 117 regular-season and 
playoff games this year _ the record is 118, set by the 1906 Chicago 
Cubs _ but none were more surreal than their victory over the Rangers 
in Game 3. Cone went to dinner with his father, Spencer and David 
Wells on Thursday night, and Wells watched Cone as he chewed a steak, 
saw how quiet Cone was, how intense. He was sure Cone would dominate 
the Rangers, but did not say anything to anybody. ``I didn't want 
to put a curse on it,'' Wells said. Cone slept poorly that night, 
his mind flooded with thoughts of Strawberry, and even as he took 
the mound for the bottom of the first inning on Friday, Cone found 
himself thinking of his teammate. Once he started pitching, however, 
Cone felt he was able to focus entirely on the Texas batters. When 
pitching with five or more days of rest since May, Cone's earned run 
average in the regular season was 1.57, or more than two runs lower 
than when he pitched with four days of rest. Cone had five days of 
rest on Friday, and he was in control, strong. Through the first five 
innings, catcher Joe Girardi said, he was pitching as sharply as he 
has at any point during the season. But Aaron Sele, the Rangers' right-hander, 
was pitching effectively as well, stifling the top of the Yankees' 
lineup. Before the fifth inning began, with a scoreless tie, Torre 
collected the first five hitters in his lineup _ Chuck Knoblauch, 
Derek Jeter, Paul O'Neill, Bernie Williams and Tino Martinez _ in 
the runway and told them they were going about their business as if 
they were down two games to none. Just relax, Torre said. Batting 
with one out in the top of the sixth inning, O'Neill waited on a high 
curveball and smashed it to deep left-center, the ball carrying over 
the wall and into the Yankees' bullpen. Even before O'Neill circled 
the bases, however, the flags above the Ballpark changed direction 
and looked frozen in a stiff wind; a storm was coming in. Martinez 
hit an infield single with two outs, and Tim Raines poked a double 
into the left-field corner, Martinez stopping at third. Dick Bosman, 
the Texas pitching coach, went to the mound as Spencer waited at home 
plate. Hints of lightning could be seen in the distance. The rain 
started, sending fans scurrying for cover. In his first at-bat, Sele 
had thrown Spencer a meaty curveball, and Spencer had popped up. Before 
this at-bat, in the sixth inning, Spencer told himself to stay back 
and wait for the pitch to come to him. Sele spun a curveball, Spencer 
recognized it, and he hit it. Leading off third base, Martinez saw 
the ball jump off Spencer's bat, toward the left field wall. You've 
got to be kidding, Martinez thought, joyfully. Players on the Yankees' 
bench lurched forward to follow the flight of the ball. ``Get up!'' 
a few yelled. It cleared, and Spencer circled the bases, with that 
look of astonishment on his face. ``We felt like he looked,'' Cone 
said. ``We were in awe.'' Spencer said: ``I'm enjoying it. As long 
as I am not getting booed off the field, I guess I can't complain.'' 
The Yankees led, 4-0, and Cone retired the first two batters in the 
bottom of the sixth before sheets of rain began to fall, a torrential 
downpour. Cone walked off the mound, angry in the knowledge that he 
probably would not pitch when play resumed. ``It's going to be a long 
one,'' Umpire Joe Brinkman told Cone of the delay. Play stopped at 
10:08 p.m. New York time, with the Yankees 10 outs from finishing 
the series. They waited and waited, Torre playing hearts, O'Neill 
indulging in too many cookies, many of the players lounging in the 
clubhouse and watching the movie ``Dumb and Dumber.'' They all felt 
like they were bouncing off the walls, O'Neill said. The rain stopped 
around midnight, and the grounds crew started removing the tarp before 
the sheets of water fell again. At some point, league officials began 
planning for the possibility that the game would be suspended for 
the night, then resumed Saturday. The Yankees did not want that. They 
wanted to finish the Rangers and be done with the series. Finally, 
the rain stopped, and the game resumed at 1:24 a.m., with Graeme Lloyd 
on the mound for the Yankees. Lloyd gave way to Jeff Nelson for the 
seventh and eighth innings, and Nelson turned over the ball to Mariano 
Rivera in the ninth. Rivera completed the shutout at 2:26, and the 
Yankees started dousing each other with champagne, with Tim Raines 
pausing to toast Strawberry to great cheers. The Texas Rangers had 
the most potent offense in the American League, outside of the Bronx, 
and in three games they mustered one run and 13 hits, a .133 batting 
average. ``If they keep pitching the way they're pitching,'' said 
Todd Stottlemyre, the Rangers' right-hander, ``it's going to be real 
tough to beat them.'' Said the Texas slugger Juan Gonzalez, ``To beat 
the Yankees, you have to play perfect, because the Yankees have everything 
_ speed, power, good relievers, a good pitching staff.'' And now they 
have three days off before moving on to their next assignment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>