<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981007.1830.0543 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight we have the clearest picture yet of what happened on Swissair 
flight 111 in the final minutes. They still do not know why the plane 
crashed off Nova Scotia last month. We have learned some of the details 
from the plane's recorders that tell us what the passengers and the 
crew were going through. Here's ABC's Lisa Stark. This is the McDonnell 
Douglas MD-11 that crashed off the coast of Canada. On the evening 
it took off from New York, everything seemed routine. About one hour 
into the flight, 20 minutes before the crash, the crew notices an 
unusual smell. The Colt, who was flying, turns the control over to 
the captain and gets out of his seat to investigate. He reports there 
is nothing down where he looked. Leaving some investigators to suggest 
the copilot may have checked the electronics bay under the cockpit 
and found nothing. Which may mean electronics in the overhead panel 
are the source of the problem. The crew calls in a flight attendant. 
Can she smell smoke in the passenger cabin, they ask. No, but she 
does smell it in the cockpit. The flight data recorder shows no indication 
of fire from the engines or cargo holds. Within three minutes of smelling 
something, the captain indicates he can now definitely see smoke in 
the cockpit. A minute later the crew makes its first distress call 
of "pan, pan, pan" to request a landing. Within two minutes after 
that, the cockpit crew has put on their oxygen masks. It is 11 minutes 
before the crash. In the back of the plane, dinner is being served, 
passengers now learn something is wrong. A flight attendant announces 
the plane will land in Halifax in 20 minutes to 25 minutes, an indication 
pilots still feel they have plenty of time to get the plane safely 
on the ground. The pilot begins an emergency checklist trying to isolate 
the source of the smoke. The first step, turning off all power to 
the cabin, which leaves just emergency lighting in the back of the 
plane. Flight attendants are told use flashlights to pick up meal 
trays. They report the passengers remain relatively calm. It is not 
calm in the cockpit. At this point, six minutes before the crash, 
something goes terribly wrong. At the same moment, both pilots scramble 
for the radio to declare an emergency. They need to land immediately. 
The data recorder now picks up problems with a flight control computer 
and other systems. Within 30 seconds, the copilot reports he has lost 
all of his main instruments. Seconds later, both data and voice recorders 
quit working. And there is no further communication with air traffic 
control. Six minutes later, the plane hits the water. Lisa Stark, 
ABC News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>