<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981007.1830.1235 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have been taken up this week with the value of privacy. Privacy 
lost in the minds of many people. But not all, and we'll get to that. 
But first we're going to take "A closer look" at privacy and the telephone. 
It's the most familiar invasion of privacy that people are dealing 
with. The image of government listening in has been with us for a 
long time. In some places, with very good reason. ABC's John Miller 
reports from Los Angeles. There are 6.5 million telephones in L.A. 
and for years in California, only federal authorities could use a 
legal wiretap. Then, in 1989, California passed a law targeting drug 
dealers that allows police to use wiretaps when all other investigative 
techniques have failed. What's the wiretapping trend here in L.A.? 
To wiretap a lot and to wiretap everybody. Kathy quant, a lawyer in 
the public defender's office, charges that police in L.A. are using 
wiretaps as a first step, not a last resort as required by law, and 
that many thousands of people are being overheard improperly. Every 
wire, everything we've sought has all been judicially authorized. 
The district attorney's office says since 1993, they have only applied 
for 90 wiretap orders. But the number of wiretap orders does not reflect 
the number of people being overheard. This one wiretap order allowed 
police to listen in on 350 different telephones and for a long time. 
The average wiretap lasts 30 days. Not in Los Angeles. It lasted almost 
two years. Prosecutors say some of the taps lead them to drugs and 
drug money, but most of the taps seem to lead nowhere while grossly 
violating privacy. In one case, five L.A. public pay phones were tapped. 
Police listened to 131,000 conversations, resulting in no arrests. 
California law requires that when a wiretap is concluded, the authorities 
have to notify everyone who was overheard, especially people who were 
not suspects. Now, the D.A.'s office admits, in most cases, they never 
told anyone. It was indeed an oversight. There's no question about 
it. Oversights that legal scholars say could bring privacy lawsuits 
and cause convictions to be overturned. While prosecutors and defense 
lawyers grapple over the legality of thousands of intercepted conversations, 
no branch of government seems to be too eager to take the lead in 
getting to the bottom of all this. Not the attorney general, not the 
judges, not the legislature. Right now, L.A.'s big brother story seems 
to be a political hot potato. John Miller, ABC News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>