<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981007.1830.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin tonight with counting heads and twisting arms. 
The House of Representatives is going to vote tomorrow on whether 
to move ahead with a wide-ranging impeachment inquiry of President 
Clinton. Tonight the big question is what kind of support will the 
president get from members of his own party? The president has made 
an enormous effort to get democrats in line, but congressmen and women 
are also listening to what they hear at home. First we go to the White 
House and Sam Donaldson. sam. Peter, many democrats have resented 
the president's lobbying tactics. There's mounlting evidence that 
many of them intend to vote yes. The president appears to have changed 
his strategy or at least accepted the inevitable and is no longer 
portraying this vote as a matter of personal or party loyalty. To 
reporters, today, the president summed up his advice on how to vote 
this way. I think the vote should be a vote of principle. It's up 
to others to decide what happens to me, and ultimately it's going 
to be up to the American people to make a clear statement there. Pressed 
on what that meant -- I think everyone should cast a vote on principle 
and conscience. Principle and conscience is a far cry from saying 
"vote my way, period." In fact, many house democrats do not want to 
do something that might damage their own re-election chances on a 
vote that is both a foregone conclusion and not anywhere near the 
end game. A message Vic Fazio, chairman of the house democratic caucus 
delivered to the president today. I think tomorrow's vote is a question 
members are having to respond to in the context of an election. They 
are going to be going back and spending three or four weeks with their 
constituents. I think this is not the vote you are all interested 
in covering. That will come in November or December. Fazio was clearly 
saying this vote isn't the important one and members have to save 
themselves at election time. Press secretary was careful so say there 
would be no retaliation. For those, for whatever reason decide to 
vote, to move forward under the proposal put forward by the republicans, 
that we will work with them. What are the expect stations here? The 
traditional tactic is to put out the word you expect massive defections. 
There's much nervousness here tonight, Peter, instead of wasting time 
playing that game, they're simply keeping their fingers crossed. Let's 
look at this vote a little more congressionally perspective. Send 
to the president and their constituents with an election coming? ABC's 
Linda Douglass is on Capitol Hill. On the eve of tomorrow's vote, 
some moderate democrats step forward to say they may have no choice 
but to vote for an impeachment inquiry or pay a price with the voters 
in November. If democrats want credibility on the real vote of consequence, 
which is the vote of impeachment I think they may erode that credibility 
by voting against even proceeding with an inquiry. Does this breach 
the high threshold in this country of an impeachable offense? I have 
very deep doubts that it does, but we should inquire about it. Democratic 
leaders urged their members to reject the republicans wide-ranging 
impeachment inquiry and vote for a democratic alternative which would 
limit the scope of the investigation and give it a deadline. This 
is a moment for the Congress to decide, not whether to go forward, 
but how to go forward. But sources say that won't satisfy many democrats 
who want to vote for the republican proposal which has no restrictions. 
That way they cannot be accused of protecting the president. Some 
members complain quietly they resented White House pressure to oppose 
an inquiry, a senior senator warned the White House to back off. I 
would suggest by way of friendly advice to the White House, don't 
tamper with this jury. And late today, the independent counsel, Kenneth 
Starr sent a letter to the House of Representatives saying that he 
is continuing to investigate matters about the president and may yet 
send up, has not ruled out sending up, further evidence of offenses 
that could be impeachable. That may cause even more democrats to vote 
tomorrow for a wide-ranging inquiry. Thank you, Linda. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>