<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981007.0528 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov gave his Communist deputy broad powers 
over the new government's economic course, Russian media reported 
Wednesday. However, Primakov plans to personally oversee the Finance 
Ministry, indicating he wants to reserve for himself the final say 
on major economic decisions. First Deputy Prime Minister Yuri Maslyukov, 
who served as the last head of the Soviet central planning agency, 
has pushed for full control over the economic-related ministries. 
Maslyukov will be in charge of economic and trade ministries and various 
other bodies, including the committee for state property management 
that oversees privatization. He will also be acting prime minister 
during Primakov's absence and oversee talks with the International 
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and other international lenders, Russian 
media reported. Liberal economists have been critical of Maslyukov, 
saying he is likely to opt for at least some Soviet-style controls 
on the economy. Primakov says he will continue with economic reforms, 
but opposes the ``wild capitalism'' that has characterized Russia's 
moves toward a market economy. Primakov has decided to personally 
oversee the finance, foreign, defense and interior ministries, as 
well as tax service and customs committee and several other agencies, 
the ITAR-Tass and Interfax news agencies reported Wednesday. Cabinet 
ministers will still be appointed to those ministries, but their policies 
will be subject to final approval by Primakov, and ultimately by Russian 
President Boris Yeltsin. Also Wednesday, Maslyukov said the government 
would drop import duties on several key food items and lower them 
on other food and medicines, in an effort to fill store shelves emptied 
by the economic crisis. He did not say what products would be affected. 
Primakov spoke on national television Tuesday evening, the day before 
nationwide strikes, and assured Russians that the government would 
pay off all wage and pension arrears and make sure there would be 
no shortage of basic foods. Meanwhile, Finance Minister Mikhail Zadornov 
criticized a recent statement by Maslyukov, who said that Russia would 
be unable to pay its debts this fall without help from the International 
Monetary Fund. Zadornov insisted that Russia could make the payments 
without IMF aid, and that Maslyukov's words didn't help advance Russia's 
interests, the business daily Kommersant said. Zadornov, who is in 
Washington pushing the IMF and other lenders to give more money to 
Russia, didn't explain how the government would finance its spending 
without Western aid. ``We must clearly understand, that any attempt 
to solve wage and pension debts by cranking up money-printing presses 
will lead to sharp rise in prices,'' Zadornov said on Russian television. 
The IMF wants the Russian government to come up with a sound economic 
program approved by the parliament as a condition for further loans. 
Maslyukov said the government expects to complete its plan to revive 
the economy by the end of the month and indicated that it may still 
turn to money-printing if it does not get IMF aid. ``So far, prospects 
for our cooperation with the international financial organizations 
remain unclear and that's why the government hasn't made a decision 
yet on which financial and economic plan it would implement to stabilize 
the situation,'' Maslyukov said at a meeting with western bankers, 
according to the Russian news agencies. The delivery of the next installment 
of a previously negotiated IMF loan would ``create conditions to stop 
any talk about printing money,'' he added. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>