<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981007.0878 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Empty pockets and anger over the failure of Boris Yeltsin's government 
to end years of economic malaise drove hundreds of thousands of Russians 
to nationwide protests Wednesday, but disillusionment and pragmatism 
kept many more away. Miners, monarchists, students and business people 
took to the streets from Moscow to Vladivostok in the first major 
public protest since an economic crisis hit in August, but the peaceful 
demonstrations fell far short of organizers' predictions they would 
be the biggest anti-Yeltsin protest ever. Many Russians eschew politics 
for reasons ranging from apathy after decades of Soviet authoritarianism 
to a traditional Russian fatalism that people have to make the best 
of things. Others shunned the protests because of fear of violence 
or their association with the Communists, who have the support of 
about 20 percent of the population. ``We've got to work, to make money. 
I don't have time for this,'' said Natasha Krasikova, a salesclerk 
in the GUM department store adjacent to Red Square, where tens of 
thousands of Muscovites rallied. ``The only people who go to these 
protests are the ones who don't have anything to do with themselves.'' 
The peaceful protests, organized by trade unions and the powerful 
Communist Party, appeared to create little momentum for serious change 
in the world's largest country. ``These sorts of protests are not 
the road to revolution,'' said Sergei Tuchin, 49, an unemployed writer 
in Moscow who did not take part because he doubted they would make 
a difference. While the demonstrations were spurred by the latest 
crisis, which has seen the ruble plummet, the markets collapse and 
inflation soar, most marchers were protesting over months, sometimes 
years, of unpaid salaries and pensions. ``We will not allow Yeltsin 
to destroy us,'' national trade union leader Mikhail Shmakov said 
in Moscow. ``We want a president who solves the concrete problems 
of the country and doesn't make empty promises.'' The Communists often 
wildly overestimate turnout predictions for such actions. They forecast 
as many as 40 million of Russia's 148 million people would take part, 
while the government said just 615,000 people showed up in demonstrations 
in 494 cities. That was less than a third of the last big nationwide 
protest, which drew about 2 million in March 1997. At Moscow's rally, 
organizers claimed some 400,000 people marched in a nippy but sunny 
fall day, but the motley crowd appeared closer to 30,000. Among the 
marchers were hard-line Stalinist and fascist groups, non-political 
trade unions _ including the stock exchange dealers union _ and bands 
of young people making fun of old Communist protesters. Riot police 
looked on. Many of the marchers were elderly, with few young people 
taking part. Organizers said they were pleased with the response, 
noting that the protest was not limited to public rallies, but also 
included union meetings, work stoppages and strikes throughout the 
country. There were no reports of significant disruption to public 
services. The protesters were united in their frustration but differed 
widely in their specific remedies. Some carried photos of Soviet founder 
Vladimir Lenin, while others hoisted flags from Russia's czarist era. 
The unions focused on the economy. Millions of workers get paid months 
late, and inflation for the year is forecast at 200 percent. The Communists, 
meanwhile, have been calling for Yeltsin's resignation and see the 
protests as a way to further weaken the president, who still has two 
years left in his term. Some trade unions did not want to be linked 
to the Communists. Aides to Communist leader Gennady Zyuganov, said 
the unions blocked him from addressing the Moscow protest. Yeltsin 
said he was pleased that the protests were peaceful, the Interfax 
news agency reported. Fear kept some people home Wednesday, because 
the Communists' rhetorical buildup to the protest had many expecting 
violence. Some Western companies closed early, and traffic was light 
on Moscow's usually clogged streets. Thousands of police and security 
troops were mobilized. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>