<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981007.0557 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Warning that the ``decisive moment'' is approaching, a senior U.S. 
envoy scheduled more talks Wednesday with Slobodan Milosevic after 
failing to persuade the Yugoslav president to pull out more forces 
from Kosovo to avoid NATO airstrikes. Milosevic has remained defiant 
through two meetings, during which Richard Holbrooke sought to convince 
him that Washington is equally firm in demanding that he comply with 
U.N. resolutions or face military action. Reflecting a grim mood, 
Holbrooke had only terse public comments ahead of Wednesday's latest 
talks. ``The situation's extremely serious,'' he said. Despite a Security 
Council declaration Tuesday that the combatants in Kosovo had not 
yet fully complied with U.N. resolutions demanding a cease-fire and 
the withdrawal of special Serb police units, a U.S. spokesman said 
Wednesday there was still no consensus for military action. ``We are 
continuing to push for military action against the Serbs,'' State 
Department spokesman James Rubin said. ``NATO is not there yet.'' 
A decision is possible by the weekend, after U.S. Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright meets Thursday with NATO officials and Holbrooke 
in Brussels. Preparations for intervention continued Wednesday. Britain, 
France and Germany all recommended that their citizens leave Yugoslavia. 
Canada has already evacuated all nonessential diplomatic staff and 
their families from its Belgrade embassy, and U.S. officials said 
dependents of its embassy employees would soon be evacuated. Milosevic 
launched his crackdown Feb. 28 against the ethnic Albanian Kosovo 
Liberation Army, which is fighting for independence for Kosovo. Hundreds 
have been killed and more than 250,000 people have been driven from 
their homes in the southern province in Serbia, the main republic 
of Yugoslavia. Following a Tuesday night meeting between Milosevic 
and Holbrooke in Belgrade, diplomatic sources said there was no change 
in Milosevic's refusal to accept international demands, particularly 
on the withdrawal of all security forces from Kosovo. The Yugoslav 
leader repeatedly claimed there has been no military activity in the 
province for eight days _ something the ethnic Albanians dispute. 
The fact that the two had agreed to a third meeting Wednesday indicated 
that there was still a chance for an agreement. ``Right now, we are 
in the countdown to a decisive moment in the history of the Balkans,'' 
Holbrooke said. Intent on showing it is working to settle the Kosovo 
conflict, Serbia sent Prime Minister Mirko Marjanovic to the province 
Wednesday for discussions with the Serbian-installed interim government 
in Kosovo, which the ethnic Albanians do not recognize. It also invited 
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to send a 
mission to Kosovo, officials said. Belgrade's state-run Politika daily 
carried a front-page headline Wednesday saying all police actions 
have ceased in Kosovo. The Serbs claim all special police units, in 
the forefront of strikes against Kosovo Albanian militants, have been 
pulled out. So far, however, international diplomatic observers have 
disputed Serb claims. A NATO official who asked not to be named said 
Wednesday that an estimated 14,000 Yugoslav army troops remain in 
Kosovo _ down from 36,000 10 days earlier. That is in addition to 
11,000 special military and anti-terrorist police, half the total 
in all of Yugoslavia. He also said 50,000 refugees remain without 
shelter, and that at least 15 percent of buildings in central and 
western Kosovo have been damaged or destroyed. ``NATO is still not 
satisfied with compliance,'' the official said. Western leaders, accusing 
Milosevic of breaking countless past promises, say all moves to end 
the conflict must be verifiable and irreversible. The ethnic Albanians' 
Kosovo Information Center said Serb forces shelled four villages Tuesday 
night and Wednesday in the Malisevo region southwest of Pristina. 
The report could not be verified. Russia was making a last-ditch effort 
Wednesday to persuade Milosevic to comply, according to a ranking 
Russian diplomat in Serbia who spoke on condition of anonymity. The 
United States is trying to get Milosevic and the ethnic Albanians 
to agree on a deal that would defer for two or three years a decision 
on whether Kosovo would separate from Serbia. But the ethnic Albanians 
have refused to negotiate with Milosevic. Ethnic Albanians constitute 
90 percent of the 2 million people in Kosovo. Most ethnic Albanians 
favor self-rule. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>