<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981007.0300 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Boris Smirnov's family began making vodka more than a century ago, 
and has always had to satisfy two unquenchable thirsts: the Russian 
love of strong drink, and the government's craving for taxes. Russia's 
czars got up to half their revenue from taxing vodka. The Communists 
went one better, nationalizing the entire industry, including the 
Smirnov firm. And now President Boris Yeltsin's government seeks to 
fill its empty treasury by imposing greater control on Russia's prolific 
alcohol producers. ``The government already takes almost everything 
we make,'' claimed Smirnov, a burly, bearded man who runs Smirnov 
vodka from a pastel yellow mansion just a few blocks from the Kremlin. 
``If they ruin the alcohol business, then Russia won't have any money 
or anything to drink.'' But with the Russian government broke, and 
the economy crumbling by the day, the alcohol industry is once again 
an irresistible target. Yeltsin issued a decree Tuesday that calls 
for the government to take a controlling stake in all 184 distilleries 
that legally make pure alcohol. In most instances, the government 
already has a controlling interest in the distilleries, but that hasn't 
prevented a river of untaxed, illicit spirits from flowing onto the 
market. The companies that purchase their pure alcohol from the distilleries 
and then make name brands, such as Stolichnaya and Smirnov vodka, 
will remain in private hands, but they fear the greater regulation 
will affect them as well. According to the government, Russians consume 
a staggering 2.1 billion liters of vodka a year _ that's 28 bottles 
for every man, woman and child. But fewer than 1 billion liters come 
from government-licensed producers, which means that more than half 
of all vodka is eluding the tax man. Some bootleg booze comes from 
the licensed distilleries that secretly produce extra alcohol. The 
remainder comes from the bootleggers. Russia's free-for-all capitalism 
has created a robust, if chaotic, market with dozens of domestic and 
foreign companies selling cheap, plentiful booze. Indeed, the alcohol 
business is one of the country's few hardy industries. Boris Smirnov 
has been able to re-establish the firm that the Communists commandeered. 
He's also engaged in a protracted legal battle with the American-made 
brand, Smirnoff, which has been produced abroad since the 1930s, when 
a Smirnov family member who had left Russia sold the name. Smirnov's 
company now offers pepper vodka, as well as lemon, orange and cranberry. 
There's even cowberry and whortleberry vodka. Consumers are happy, 
but the government now gets no more than 4 percent of its revenues 
from alcohol taxes, down from roughly 25 percent during much of the 
Communist era. Deputy Prime Minister Gennady Kulik said the government 
has no intention of nationalizing private firms, but it does want 
a better grip on the wholesale alcohol trade. The new plan could raise 
an additional 30 billion rubles (dlrs 2 billion) a year. The scheme 
revives an age-old question about: Who is more addicted to the bottle, 
ordinary Russian citizens or their government? The newspaper Trud 
traced the first Russian alcohol tax to the 10th century, uncovered 
reports of bootleggers in the 15th century, and said the first anti-alcohol 
campaign began _ and failed _ in 1652. Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev 
tried to persuade his countrymen to give up the bottle a decade ago. 
They didn't, and he earned their eternal enmity. Yeltsin, who's been 
known to enjoy a drink, has portrayed legal consumption as a patriotic 
duty. ``When people spend their money on vodka, it should go to the 
treasury, not to swindlers,'' Yeltsin said in a radio address last 
year. ``We will give (the tax money) to pensioners, soldiers, doctors 
and teachers. It will help build the economy.'' Yeltsin's government 
last year banned vodka sales from street kiosks, where much bootleg 
vodka is sold. But enterprising kiosk owners built tiny add-on rooms 
so they could then pretend they were full-fledged stores, and thereby 
sell vodka. The government also tried to raise the minimum price for 
vodka, but that just further stimulated the black market. Legal vodka 
costs 30 rubles (dlrs 2) a bottle, and remains affordable even for 
poor Russians. Smirnov said his company makes less than one ruble 
(seven U.S. cents) for each bottle of vodka it sells, and almost half 
of that goes to taxes. ``The government should do more to fight bootleggers,'' 
Smirnov said. ``It should implement all the old laws before it introduces 
new ones.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>