<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981007.0232 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
China's press censors have banned the U.S. independent counsel's report 
detailing President Bill Clinton's affair with a White House intern, 
media and publishing sources said Wednesday. Chinese-language versions 
of the Starr report have joined a long list of proscribed publications, 
ranging from soft-porn magazines like Penthouse to the subtly subversive 
novels of Chinese lowlifes by Wang Shuo. In the case of the Starr 
report, officials disliked its salacious details and worried that 
its contents would somehow damage improving Chinese-U.S. relations, 
said the sources, who work in enterprises strictly supervised by the 
government and spoke on condition of anonymity. Like much else in 
China these days, the ban is likely to have little effect. Pornographic 
magazines and videos can be bought on many street corners. Although 
the private lives of Chinese leaders are off-limits to the media, 
interest is high. Underground copies of a banned book about the late 
Mao Tse-tung's dalliances still circulate. A popular Chinese Internet 
search engine, Sohoo, is still recording several thousand hits a day 
at its Clinton scandal site. One or two publishers of popular consumer 
guides supposedly printed the Chinese-language Starr report and distributed 
copies to local book stalls and sellers, the sources said. The Communist 
Party-run Propaganda Department, which has ultimate authority over 
the media, decided to issue the ban last week, and the government's 
Press and Publications Administration ordered book stores this week 
to take copies of the report off the shelves, the sources said. In 
a rare display of openness, the state-run Beijing Morning Post reported 
the ban on Tuesday. But executives with the newspaper contacted by 
telephone later refused to comment. A Beijing city propaganda official, 
who identified himself as Mr. Zhang, said the Beijing Morning Post 
ran an unauthorized report and that no final decision had been made. 
Press and Publications Administration officials also would not comment. 
Since Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky became front-page 
news in the United States in January, Chinese reporters have been 
subjected to endless Propaganda Department directives not to report 
any sexual details, the sources said. One source said the Propaganda 
Department tried to put together an edited, cleaned-up version of 
the Starr report, but found it impossible to do. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>