<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981007.0248 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Warning that the ``decisive moment'' is approaching, a senior U.S. 
envoy scheduled more talks Wednesday with Slobodan Milosevic after 
failing to persuade the Yugoslav president to pull out more forces 
from Kosovo to avoid NATO airstrikes. Milosevic has remained defiant 
through two meetings, during which Richard Holbrooke sought to convince 
him that Washington is equally firm in demanding that he comply with 
U.N. resolutions or face military action. Reflecting a grim mood in 
the U.S. delegation, Holbrooke had only terse public comments Wednesday. 
``The situation's extremely serious,'' he said, indicating Milosevic 
has still not fully complied. At U.N. headquarters Tuesday, the Security 
Council declared that the combatants in Kosovo had not yet fully complied 
with U.N. resolutions demanding a cease-fire and the withdrawal of 
special Serb police units. While the U.N. action carries no legal 
weight, NATO officials say they are prepared to launch airstrikes 
swiftly after a final decision is made. A decision is possible by 
the weekend, after NATO ambassadors meet Thursday and the six-nation 
Contact Group on the Balkans convenes Friday in London. Holbrooke 
also may brief U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright Thursday 
in Brussels. ``There's no doubt at all that we have to take action 
to prevent a humanitarian disaster in Kosovo,'' British Prime Minister 
Tony Blair said Wednesday in Beijing. Following a meeting between 
Milosevic and Holbrooke in Belgrade Tuesday night, diplomatic sources 
said there was no change in Milosevic's refusal to accept international 
demands, particularly on the withdrawal of all security forces from 
Kosovo. The Yugoslav leader repeatedly claimed there has been no military 
activity in the province for eight days. The fact that the two had 
agreed to a third meeting Wednesday afternoon indicated that there 
was still a chance for an agreement. ``Right now, we are in the countdown 
to a decisive moment in the history of the Balkans,'' Holbrooke said. 
Intent on showing it is working to settle the Kosovo conflict, Serbia 
sent Prime Minister Mirko Marjanovic to the province Wednesday for 
discussions with the Serbian-installed interim government in Kosovo, 
which the ethnic Albanians do not recognize. Milosevic launched his 
crackdown Feb. 28 against the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army, 
which is fighting for independence for Kosovo, a province of Serbia, 
the main republic of Yugoslavia. Hundreds have been killed and more 
than 250,000 people have been driven from their homes. Belgrade's 
state-run Politika daily carried a front-page headline Wednesday saying 
all police actions have ceased in Kosovo. The Serbs claim all special 
police units, in the forefront of strikes against Kosovo Albanian 
militants, have been pulled out. On Tuesday, reporters saw about 100 
Yugoslav security vehicles of all sorts _ from armored personnel carriers 
to trucks loaded with troops _ moving outside Kosovo in an apparent 
show of Milosevic's compliance with international demands. So far, 
however, international diplomatic observers have disputed Serb claims. 
Western leaders, accusing Milosevic of breaking countless past promises, 
say all moves to end the conflict must be verifiable and irreversible. 
``We have to make sure he (Milosevic) is withdrawing from a position 
where he is able to commit these atrocities, these acts of barbarism 
in Kosovo, and he should know very clearly that if he doesn't then 
serious action will follow,'' Blair said in a BBC radio interview 
Wednesday. The United States is trying to get Milosevic and the ethnic 
Albanians to agree on a deal that would defer for two or three years 
a decision on whether Kosovo would separate from Serbia. But the ethnic 
Albanians have refused to negotiate with Milosevic. Ethnic Albanians 
constitute 90 percent of the 2 million people in Kosovo. Most ethnic 
Albanians favor self-rule. Serb nationalists already are lining up 
behind Milosevic in his defiant stance toward the West. The notorious 
Serb warlord known as Arkan has threatened to regroup his paramilitary 
fighters, widely accused of atrocities in the war in Bosnia, to attack 
Western forces if they intervene. ``We shall not kneel before NATO 
missiles,'' he said in comments reported by Belgrade media Wednesday. 
``We shall not allow ourselves to become enslaved to NATO or any other 
foreign power.'' Britain's Foreign Office said Wednesday it was advising 
Britons in Yugoslavia to leave. Canada has evacuated all nonessential 
diplomatic staff and their families from its Belgrade embassy, and 
other countries are expected to follow suit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>