<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981007.0866 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Washington sought to build a consensus in NATO for air attacks 
on Yugoslavia, a U.S. envoy gave President Slobodan Milosevic another 
chance Wednesday to bow to international demands and avoid airstrikes. 
Richard Holbrooke was holding a third round of talks with Milosevic 
after failing twice to persuade the defiant Serb leader to pull out 
more forces from Kosovo province and enter negotiations with ethnic 
Albanians on the future of the province. Describing the situation 
as ``extremely serious,'' Holbrooke tried to convince Milosevic that 
Washington was firm in demanding that he comply with U.N. resolutions 
on Kosovo or face airstrikes. A decision on the strikes is possible 
by the weekend, after U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright meets 
Thursday with NATO officials and Holbrooke in Brussels. Holbrooke 
is expected to travel to the NATO headquarters straight from the Belgrade 
talks. But despite mounting evidence of Milosevic's non-compliance 
and a U.N. declaration confirming it, Washington seemed to lack the 
international consensus needed to bomb Milosevic into compliance. 
``We are continuing to push for military action against the Serbs,'' 
State Department spokesman James Rubin said. ``NATO is not there yet.'' 
U.S. officials also face strong opposition from Russia, whose Defense 
Minister Igor Sergeyev warned Wednesday the move could lead to even 
more bloodshed in Kosovo. ``We evaluate that this is not a penalty 
or punishment of an isolated country but almost a real war,'' Marshal 
Sergeyev said in Athens, Greece. Apparently playing on Russia's opposition 
to strikes and lack of consensus within NATO, Milosevic remained defiant. 
Western diplomats close to the Holbrooke talks said late Tuesday there 
was no change in Milosevic's tough stand over Kosovo. The United States 
is trying to get Milosevic and the ethnic Albanians to agree on a 
deal that would defer for two or three years a decision on whether 
Kosovo would separate from Serbia. The fact that Holbrooke and Milosevic 
had agreed to a third meeting Wednesday indicated that there was still 
a chance for an agreement. Some sources in Belgrade said Milosevic 
was trying to bargain a better deal. Meanwhile, the rhetoric out of 
Washington was equally uncompromising. ``I do not believe the United 
States can be in a position, I do not believe NATO can be in a position, 
of letting tens of thousands of people to starve or freeze to death 
this winter...'' Clinton said. In Brussels, Belgium, NATO Secretary-General 
Javier Solana said ``NATO will take a decision of their own.'' That 
implied the alliance would not insist on the U.N. approval, some U.S. 
allies and Russia believe necessary. Preparations for intervention 
continued in Yugoslavia and abroad. Britain, France and Germany all 
recommended that their citizens leave Yugoslavia. Canada has already 
evacuated all nonessential diplomatic staff and their families from 
its Belgrade embassy, and U.S. officials said dependents of its embassy 
employees would soon be evacuated. In Belgrade the city government 
said it was making preparations for possible strikes. Warning sirens 
blared in some Serbian towns. Some opposition parties said mobilization 
of air defense reservists was underway. Meanwhile, Milosevic tried 
to show that he was working to settle Kosovo crisis by dispatching 
Serbian premier Mirko Marjanovic to the province and inviting the 
54-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to the 
area. Belgrade's state-run Politika daily carried a front-page headline 
Wednesday saying all police actions have ceased in Kosovo. But Milosevic 
has a long history of breaking promises and international diplomatic 
observers have disputed Serb claims. Poland's foreign minister, the 
current chairman of OSCE expressed disappointment with Yugoslavia's 
offer, saying it allowed for a ``brief, improvised'' mission to Kosovo, 
which he described as different from what the OSCE wanted. The minister, 
Bronislaw Geremek, still stopped short of rejecting the offer outright, 
calling it a new one that required study. A NATO official who asked 
not to be named said Wednesday that an estimated 14,000 Yugoslav army 
troops remain in Kosovo _ down from 36,000 10 days earlier. That is 
in addition to 11,000 special military and anti-terrorist police, 
half the total in all of Yugoslavia. He also said 50,000 refugees 
remain without shelter, and that at least 15 percent of buildings 
in central and western Kosovo have been damaged or destroyed. Western 
leaders say all moves to end the conflict must be verifiable and irreversible. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>