<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981007.2130.0319 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
How can parents and students pay for the rising cost of college education 
without going into debt? We're joined now by financial planner Eric 
Tyson, author of the best selling book, "personal finance for dummies." 
First, let's look at prepaid tuition plans which are offered by many 
states. This allows parents to pay for future tuition at today's rates. 
Then, when your child is ready for college, their tuition, or part 
of it, is already paid for if they go to a public school. Some states 
allow you to use the money at a private school, or out of state, but 
the benefits are less. Eric, what do you think? What are the pluses 
and minuses of these programs? For the major reason that it really 
in most cases restricts where your child can go to college. It is 
really hard to know so many years in advance where your 18-year-old 
down the road is going to want to go to school. I don't know that 
you want to limit those choices. These plans will appeal and do appeal 
to people who don't want the hassle and stress and anxiety of having 
to invest the money on their own. What if for some reason the kid 
doesn't go to college? Yeah. That's one of the problems with the plan. 
And the plans also in many states are pretty restrictive in not allowing 
you to go out of state. I mean, in some cases you can, but in most 
cases you can't. What about the education I.R.A.? This one allows 
parents to set aside up to $500 a year for the future cost of higher 
education. As long as the money is used for that purpose, it is not 
taxed. How do you feel about that one? I think those are a little 
bit better deal for most people because you're not restricted in terms 
of the colleges. However, parents are limited to put in only $500 
per year per child. That certainly will help, but it is not going 
to pay for the majority or lion's share of the cost of higher education 
for a child. So what's the best way then? Really, the best way I think 
for most parents is to keep investment money in their own name. If 
you're worried about tapping into the money if it's in your regular 
account, simply set up a different set of accounts that has your name 
on it. The advantage to parents of keeping the money in your own name 
is that it helps with qualifying for financial aid because of the 
way the financial aid system works. That's probably the biggest reason. 
The other way to keep it in your own name, is unlike money that you 
might put into a custodial account for your child, money in the parents' 
name is not accessible to the child when the child reaches the age 
of majority which is 18 or 21. Enlightening. Thank you, Eric. Thanks 
for writing the book for me, "personal finance for dumb ES," Eric 
Tyson. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>