<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981007.0130.1488 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And now, a story of a New York photographer who seeks only to reveal 
all with his lens. Jeanne Moos tells us his quest has sent him on 
a nationwide search for the naked truth. They may be naked, but they're 
not quite Stark. Take your watch off too and your glasses! I told 
you, man! It's just another nude photo shoot for Spencer tunick -- 
Follow me! Don't get naked until I tell you. Spencer has been telling 
folks all over America to undress -- from a nude woman perched on 
a New Jersey shore -- It looks like a -- like a polar bear. To 1,200 
people packed like sardines at a concert in Maine by the group phish 
to an early morning shoot in Times Square. Which one is your little 
white body here? I'm somewhere over here on the edge. Somewhere, I 
can't tell exactly. You can't recognize your own anatomy? no. The 
exhibit called "naked states" had folks at the eye 20 gallery doing 
double takes. Even the photographers grandma had a favorite. Well, 
the way we lie. Shot on the Nevada desert, Spencer traveled the country 
taking nude photos in every state. Anyone wanna do another pose? I'm 
not a nudist. I like to form shapes with the bodies. Shapes with texture 
-- nude landscapes. And often they resemble death and life and -- 
-- so this isn't supposed to be sexy? No, not at all. Don't pose! 
You fall on the ground as if you're dead! When Spencer's around, New 
York really is the naked city. All right this way! Hurry! run! He 
has to work quickly to avoid authorities. He's been arrested five 
times. Take your hat off! Take your headdress off! We had our hands 
full covering this exhibit. We're talking about everything going on 
in White House and we're worried about two breasts. It's a little 
weird. Spencer recruits models by word of mouth and handing out fliers. 
The models seem to enjoy participating in an art project. I recommend 
it to anyone. People think that when you take your clothes off it 
should -- it makes you nervous. But I find that it makes you calm. 
I was a little bit nervous at first, 'cause we got out there and I 
was like naked standing on the rocks in the Hudson river. And it's 
not something you do every morning. At least the Hudson isn't Niagara 
falls. Be careful. I'm right there. I thought I recognized you. It 
was cool, but the one thing is the street really smells. It smelled 
like feet. Spencer's backdrops range from the liftoff of the space 
shuttle at cape Canaveral to an Iowa cornfield in front of a gas station. 
In Philadelphia, a passing tugboat toots -- the nude models hoot. 
Okay, got it! I don't know if I'd like being naked with all these 
strangers, strange naked bodies. They were very nice. Our attempt 
at modesty left the guy in the cornfield looking like a sumo wrestler 
in a miniskirt. But there's one thing nude should models never flash. 
Don't smile! Jeanne Moos, CNN, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>