<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981007.2100.2273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Arizona senator John McCain of the Senate armed forces committee has 
written to the president expressing his views on what could be coming 
military conflict in Kosovo. Senator, what did you tell the president? 
There is clearly a humanitarian issue here and also a national interest 
here because if this conflict spreads throughout the region, it obviously 
threatens United States interests. But he's got to explain to the 
American people why these air strikes are necessary, what he expects 
to achieve, assure us that it will not mean the presence of U.S. ground 
troops in a peacekeeping force. The Europeans can handle that issue. 
And that there is a plan to end this conflict, unlike what has happened 
in Bosnia where it's just sort of an open-ended commitment on the 
part of the United States. At yesterday's hearing you seemed polite 
but agitated that there was no game plan, no play book on this. Did 
you ever get satisfactory answers? I did not and I was very disapainted 
in that some of the very fundamental questions will not -- have not 
been responded to. If the president wants the support of the American 
people when sending young Americans into harm's way, he's got to do 
a much better job than he and the administration have done. We keep 
telling people that war has changed with things like the cruise missile 
where you can press a button 100 miles off shore and a building blows 
up but this would still mean an airlift of American men and women 
into that region and the loss of U.N.-sponsored lives, correct? Correct. 
Cruise missiles are very spectacular but won't do the job. This will 
require the use of manned aircraft, which always endangers American 
lives. But also we have to determine what we seek in Kosovo. Autonomy? 
Independence? And how do we prevent this terrible tragedy that may 
ensue in a few weeks, meaning that tens of thousands of people may 
freeze to death. That has all got to be explained, and I would argue 
before the launch of whatever attacks, not after. We both know this 
Con be a more preoccupied White House right now. The first lady today 
was telling freshmen members of Congress please don't vote against 
my husband in this instance. So they're pulled in a million different 
directions. If they came to you for advice, what should we do over 
there, what's your 30-second answer? We should act militarily, substantially 
and not in a pinprick fashion. We should have a comprehensive and 
cohesive plan for ending this conflict permanently and make sthuresha 
-- sure that we don't Schmidt American ground troops into the region 
and explain it directly and clearly to the American impeachment Arizona 
republican senator jock McCain, always a pleasure. Thank you for coming 
on. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>