<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981007.2100.0544 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a vote expected tomorrow in the full House of Representatives 
on possible impeachment hearings, the next question becomes timing, 
specifically the coming elections. With us tonight to talk politics 
and the strategy heading into November, if any, haley barbour, former 
chairman of the republican national committee until last year. Now 
he's a public policy consultant in Washington. We're also joined by 
Peter Fenn, democratic strategist who currently advises several members 
of Congress. Peter, was it not moxie perhaps at work today when the 
first lady calls in a couple freshmen in Congress and says look, we 
know you got these races back home but try to come with us on this 
one and we'll take care of your needs if indeed you return to the 
capital victorious? I think one of the things that happened today, 
Brian, was that both the president and the first lady expressed concerns 
about this vote. Obviously he they want to keep as many democrats 
as they possibly can within the fold. But they both said this is a 
matter of conscience, this is up to you. And they all said we'll be 
with you regardless of how you vote on this. Except we're calling 
you over to the White House, feeding you and I'm the first lady and 
I'm his wife and you know the way we would like you to vote? Right, 
right. I mean they're obviously signaling that they would like them 
with them but I don't think -- we're not talking about Lyndon Johnson 
arm-twisting tactics here or Gee, if you'll be with me, I'll give 
you a Dam in your state. None of that going stpwhrofpblet no one gives 
a damn any more anyway. And haley barbour, isn't it a little bit macabre 
that all this cast of characters, there say political liaison staff 
at the White House and it's the first lady who's doing this. I think 
the first lady's been right there defending the president since the 
Gennifer Flowers deal. They found out then she was a very effective 
defender of the president. I think she and the president and the whole 
White House staff would do well though, Brian, to take senator Robert 
Byrd's advice and don't tamper with this jury. Another bit of advice 
from a former senator on your side of the aisle, Mr. barbour, Bob 
Dole, and that S. to paraphrase, don't screw this up, don't overplay 
your hand. This could -- you could paint a scenario where this could 
become the political exploding cigar of 1998 as for the G.O.P. as 
the government shutdown was a few years back. Who in your party that 
you know of is counseling folks, we need not touch this story, just 
let it sit out there? I think the people in our party are counseling 
members just what the republicans and democrats ought to do -- be 
deliberate, judicious, be fair, as bipartisan as you can be but at 
the end of the day you have to follow the facts and the law and the 
constitution, wherever they may lead. Now, there is going to be a 
impeachment inquiry. Every democrat on the Judiciary committee earlier 
this week voted for an impeachment inquiry. They voted for a different 
one than the republicans but tomorrow every one I suspect is going 
to substitute a democrat impeachment inquiry for what the republicans 
are proposing but we're going to have a impeachment inquiry that everybody 
is going to have voted for in one form or the other and once it starts, 
people need to be temprate in what they say and follow the facts and 
the constitution and the law wherever they lead. Peter Fenn, "Saturday 
night live" this past weekend did a phony commercial for a senator 
who had lost his private parts in a fire and thus was perfectly suited 
to be elected to office because he could not have an extramarital 
affair. It's a lot of sholier than thou talk out there, spawning an 
spire entire new era of boy scout politics. Some of it worries me 
greatly too, Brian, because you've got all these personal questions 
asked of candidates which weren't asked before in such a direct fashion 
and it's discouraging people, to be honest with you, from getting 
involved in politics. And I think the other thing is the highly partisan 
nature of this inquiry and this investigation so far of Starr and 
his lutes and of some of the medium on shall -- people on Capitol 
Hill and I think that bothers a lot of people because they really 
do not see the light at the end of the tunnel here and are very worried 
that this is going to go on and on and on and really bring down the 
country and I think politically too in November if voters sense that 
candidates want to talk more sbt -- about the scandal than about issues, 
they're going to be in trouble. That's happening I think in some republican 
races. Peter, net gain of how many seats on the G.O.P. side? I think 
that there may be a slight net gain on the part of the republicans 
but I do not see a wholesale bloodletting here, I don't see the democrats 
losing 20, 30 seats and 8 in the Senate. I think incumbents are very 
strong this year. And to the former R.N.C. chairman, realizing, you 
know, you have a conflict on this one, what is your answer? As if 
Peter doesn't have a conflict? My answer is that two years ago today, 
Brian, the democrats, with $100 million from labor, thought they were 
about to win the house back. These elections are a month away. If 
it were today, the republicans would make a gain, 10 or 15 seats. 
But the election isn't today and the republicans that have got their 
heads on straight are remembering that these elections are still to 
be held. We're not home free. We're going to ask that you just Hang 
on with us. We're going to take a short break and resume our conversation 
right after this. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>