<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981007.2100.1073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Peter Fenn and haley barbour are our guests. And Peter Fenn I would 
like to begin with segment with you. What about the chances? And this 
is a real chance if you talk to some -- of course, they tend to be 
conspiracy theoryists -- that Mr. Starr has some sort of a November 
surprise. I wouldn't put anything by Mr. Starr, to be honest with 
you. He has said that he has other material that he's going to send 
up. Whether it amounts to much or not, I'm not sure. There is a lot 
of sound and fury about his report here and there were all these discussions 
about the talking points and all these obstruction of justice charges 
and we haven't seen too much of it. So, you know, I think we have 
to look at the source here and realize that this is a prosecutor with 
a real bent on getting the president. And so anything that's going 
to come out of his shop is going to be very tough and very unbalanced, 
to be honest with you. Haley barbour, what about inner Sha here? This 
is -- inertia here? This is going to be very tough to stop if in fact 
public opinion turns violently against the G.O.P., if there are one 
or two articles be impeachment that constitutional scholars say are 
fishy or suspicious, what do you do then as a party? First of all, 
you don't prejudge the jury. We're going to have two different votes 
tomorrow in which everybody in the house is going to vote for one 
or the other on an impeachment inquiry. It's likely to finish this 
year. But I don't know how it's going to turn out but I do know this, 
that prout the -- throughout the process, the democrats are going 
to want to say it's partisan and political without ever saying that 
this was started by Janet Reno. When the Monica Lewinsky story came 
out, it was taken to Janet Reno, who immediately said it should be 
investigated. A three-judge federal court said it immediately should 
be investigated. 2/3 of the democrats in the house a couple weeks 
ago voted to pursue this. Every democrat on the Judiciary committee 
voted earlier this week that there should be some kind of an impeachment 
inquiry and the idea that this is a nefarious plot Ken Starr dreamed 
up just doesn't hold water. I do know this, there's going to be an 
inquiry, and wherever it learksdz the constitution ought to prevail. 
Haley, I hate to say it but I think it's going to lead exactly where 
it started, and that is with the peeping Tom prosecutor. Once these 
facts start to come out about Linda Tripp, about the lawyers talking 
to each other before the Reno approval where there was material put 
in there that appears now to be questionable -- so all these things 
that you describe about Starr calls into question in my mind his ethics, 
his approach and the partisan nature of this. And I think that in 
the end it is going to be about a sexual relationship, an illicit 
one where the president was not truthful but the question the American 
people and the Congress have to decide, is that an impeachable offense? 
Haley barbour, would you agree that at minimum Ken Starr has been 
unavailable above the fray? Would you agree at minimum that it would 
serve a lot of different causes to haul him up to the hill? What's 
he got to lose or hide or save at this point, and ask him about his 
methods, operations, what he's got left, because this investigation, 
this impeachment process willing predicated on his findings. Janet 
Reno or judge Holloway has asked that everything that judge Starr 
has done be investigated. That's fine but I do think one thing you 
said, Brian, is quite wrong. Starr should not go out and be a TV celebrity, 
be out promoting this case as if he were a politician. He's not a 
politician and I think he has behaved throughout this by not trying 
to go out and make political headlines. The White House wants to make 
this a political story because in politics there's no rule of law, 
there's no requirement that you tell the truth. Bill Clinton is great 
at politics. Ken Starr has had the judgment, in my mind, to stay off 
the TV stations because he's not supposed to act like a politician. 
I'm glad he's not acting like one. My question was supposed to speak 
more to taxpayer accountability. Well, judge Holloway, it's been reported 
in the press, has said that everything he's done should be looked 
into. That's going to do it, Peter Fenn and former chairman haley 
barbour. Thank you very much, guys, for curmong with us tonight. Thanks, 
Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>