<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981007.2100.2697 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
She was a woman who loved myth and fantasy and saw Onassis as a modern 
Greek hero. Aristotle Onassis. When Jackie Kennedy met him, he was 
among the world's richest men with an estimated fortune of almost 
$400 million. Almost $2 billion today. He was master of his universe. 
Myth was not a myth. The myth was reality. For more than 20 years, 
stelio papadimitriou was Onassis' personal attorney and is president 
of the Onassis foundation. Onassis was a little bit larger -- not 
a little bit. Substantially larger than life, and he knew it. He was 
Mr. Greek. The golden Greek, as he was dubbed, knew how to make money 
and how to spend T he had his own Greek island, a 500-acre paradise 
called scorpios, but his most prized possession was a 325-foot floating 
mansion, the Christina. It was as a guest on the Christina in the 
summer of 1963 that jacky Kennedy became friends with aristotle Onassis. 
He liked generally interesting women. Famous women? Interesting. The 
but also famous? He didn't mind fame. Onassis' first marriage had 
ended in divorce. And he was in the throes of a stormy relationship 
with another famous woman, opera diva Maria callas. But when President 
Kennedy was killed, aristotle Onassis was quick to rush to Jackie 
Kennedy's side. And then after the assassination, Onassis said Maria 
callas isn't bad but Jackie is even better. Writer writer says it 
took three years for Onassis to woo Jackie Kennedy. People always 
ask how could she sleep with a man who looked like that? Stelio papadimitriou 
watched the romance unfold and says Onassis was a man of hidden charms. 
He was not famous for being hand some or a fashion plate. Rather ugly, 
I would say but the moment he opened his mouth, he could seduce anyone. 
Klein says Robert Kennedy who had disapproved of Jackie's plans to 
ware John Carl warneke, opposed this match too, concerned that Onassis' 
unsavory business reputation might affect his run for the White House. 
So Jackie agreed to wait. But when Robert met the same fate as his 
brother, everything changed. After the assassination of Bobby. Jackie 
washed her hands of the United States. She felt that there was no 
safe place for her and her children in this country and she had to 
get out. Was marrying aristotle Onassis then a huge security blanket, 
take me away from this? He could provide for Jackie a real cocoon 
in which she could live a very comfortable life. Do you believe she 
loved snim BU yes but in a rather anglo sax onic way, not Greek, not 
with great passion. The couple entered into a prenuptial agreement. 
Stelio papadimitriou helped draw up the papers. There were reports 
that Jackie entered into this marriage and demand money. That is not 
true. In fact, papadimitriou says she settled for $2 to $3 million 
in the event of a dworks a fraction of the Onassis for the tufpblete 
the couple married in 196 in a Greek orthodox ceremony in the tiny 
chapel on scorpios. The Monday sign yor said Jacqueline Kennedy had 
knowingly violated church policy by marrying aristotle Onassis. I 
think Jackie never realized to what degree Americans would look on 
aristotle Onassis as some swarthy foreigner who somehow despoiled 
this virge inal, Dewey queen of Camelot and in doing so brought disgrace 
to the whole memory of John Kennedy. More than 20 years after Jackie 
Kennedy Onassis last walked this beach, it still seems she is expected 
to arrive at any moment. Stone paths, paths impeckably maintained, 
the scent of jasmine and eucalyptus on the breeze, a garden of earthly 
delights. Klein says Jackie whiled away her time swimming, reading 
poetry, painting, and redeck rating. She undertook an ambitious project 
to return scorpios to its natural state. That's how we started the 
long, long pram program of planting. Botanist nicky goulandris helped 
her find native Flowers and shrubs and the two became lifelong friends. 
She showed us her personal collect of -- collection of photographs 
of Jack ifment she disputes the stories about Jackie's compulsive 
shopping. What they were saying about the thousands of shoes she had, 
I have known her most of the time she was Bare foot, very simple dressed. 
Bought the croths from the villages around. Papadimitriou says when 
Jackie did spend money, it was with her husband's approval. You believe 
he actually encouraged her to go shopping? He liked it. And Klein 
says Onassis was equally generous with her children although Caroline 
had reservations about her new step father. It was buzz of the children, 
papadimitriou says -- Klein Klein says says, that Jackie spent less 
time with her husband. Papadimitriou says Onassis would complain bitterly 
about her absence. She is not here, I am alone. I have nothing to 
talk about. Onassis was soon seen publicly in the company of his old 
flame, Maria callas, but nicky goulandris says Jackie insisted Onassis 
was faithful. She once told me that I'm sure that ari has never had 
any relationship with any other women since we are married. It was 
her conviction. The only son of Greek shipping tycoon aristotle Onassis 
died today. According to Klein's book, Jackie's marriage suffered 
when her husband's only son was killed in a plane crash in 1973. Friends 
say he was devastated. That was the psychological death of Onassis, 
the death of his son. Papadimitriou says a despondent Onassis asked 
him to draw up divorce papers but he never went through with the plan. 
He wanted to convince Jackie she should spend more time with him. 
An idle threat but one he says Jackie believed. Meanwhile, Onassis' 
health was failing. He suffered from myasthenia gravis, a Progressive 
and fatal nerve disorder. He went went to Paris for treatment. Jackie 
commuted between Paris and New York. Nicky goulandris joined her there 
and says Jackie remained devoted to her husband. We went to church 
together and she kneeled and prayed. When Onassis died in March of 
1975, Jackie was not by his bedside but in New York with her children. 
She flew to Greece for the funeral. Onassis was buried in the little 
chapel on scorpios where they had married, his beloved son's crypt 
nearby. It was her last journey to Greece. In a letter to nicky goulandris 
she explained why. "You know how much I would love to come back to 
Greece but the commotion of the crazy photographers and the sensational 
newspaper stories they would write would destroy the tranquillity 
one came to find." Jackie Kennedy Onassis settled permanently in New 
York. She kept in touch with nicky goulandris. In a 1979 letter to 
her, she wrote "my real life is tranquil, and happy and the best thin 
thing is that the children have groan up to be strong, loffing and 
unspoiled. In 1976 she described Caroline's wedding, saying she had 
never seen two people who seemed to love each other so much. Shep 
built a successful career as a book editor and was escortd around 
town by Peter Hamill among ooze. She chose to spend the latter years 
of her life with another older, wealthier man, Belgian diamond dealer 
Maurice tempelsman, who was separated from his wife. We know he moved 
N. occupied a guest room, not her bedroom, and they were insip rable 
companions. Klein says these were happy years for Jackie. But she 
was diagnosed with cancer, lymphoma. It spread to her brain. Jackie 
retreated to her bedroom and prepared to die. No men were to be allowed 
to see her in the bedroom when she died because she didn't want to 
be seen that way even then. Klein describes a room lit by candles 
with chants. She had -- She had Ai scaffer over her hair. She was 
breathing very, very lightly. Friends came in and sat next to her 
and prayed. She just drifted off and died. She was buried next to 
President Kennedy, laid to rest at the gravesite she had helped design 
30 years earlier. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>