<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981007.2100.0049 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And good Wednesday evening to you. Not since first lady Eleanor Roosevelt 
acted as the legs, eyes, and ears of her paralyzed husband has Washington 
seen a first lady do what was done today. On behalf of her politically 
paralyzed husband, this first lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton, invited 
40 freshman members of Congress over to the White House, where she 
told them in effect I know you're all running for re-election back 
home but please don't vote to hold impeachment hearings for my husband 
and if there's anything we can do for you in return, don't hesitate 
to let us know. An extraordinary effort by the woman who has been 
publicly embarrassed by the actions of the very man she decide today. 
Publicly the president told members of Congress to vote their consciences. 
He is telling them privately to try at least to vote the democratic 
party line -- vote against impeachment hearings, that is. The vote 
is virtually a foregone conclusion. We begin with NBC's Claire Shipman. 
The president and his staff made a final attempt today to reach out 
to democrats but at the same time Bill Clinton denied any arm-twisting. 
I think everybody should cast a vote of principle and conscience. 
The point, to offer some political cover to democrats with tough races 
who may not be able to support the White House now but who may then 
be more inclined to vote against impeachment later. By -- but I think 
the vote to be -- should be a vote of principle. It's up to others 
to decide what happens to me, and ultimately it's going to be up to 
the American people to make a clear statement there. Another indicator 
of the high stakes, Mrs. Clinton was out to rally the troops, meeting 
with the house democratic freshman. She delivered this message -- 
She made the explicit point that this White House stands ready to 
work with and support democrats, help them get elected in the future 
no matter how they vote. The president explained he was merely returning 
calls to the hill but aides say he, the vice president and the first 
lady have indied been making calls as well, in effect, lobbying, but 
the White House knows it has to tread carefully, that the democrats 
are mad and saying it publicly and privately. But I would suggest 
by way of friendly advice to the White House don't tamper with this 
jury. And representative Vic Fazio, a friend of the president's, came 
to the White House to personally express democrats' worries about 
their races and anger about White House pressure. Democratic anger 
is really all over the map. Some conservative democrats are eern frustrated 
that the president didn't offer them more support today to vote with 
republicans. And finally, increased pressure on those wavering democrats 
tonight from Ken Starr. He sent a letter tonight to the house Judiciary 
committee saying he can't rule out providing in the more evidence 
to the house that would bolt Ter a case for impeachment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>