<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0463 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On a day when he had hoped to revel in the playoff exploits of the 
Yankees, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani was instead rebuked Wednesday by a 
state judge, who ruled that the mayor's maneuvers to block a referendum 
on the future of Yankee Stadium were improper, and said the issue 
should go to the voters next month. Describing the stadium as a ``tabernacle 
of sport,'' Justice Douglas McKeon of state Supreme Court in the Bronx 
rejected Giuliani's efforts to prevent the binding referendum, which 
would ask voters whether city tax dollars should be spent to help 
build a new stadium for the Yankees on the West Side of Manhattan. 
The mayor and the team's principal owner, George Steinbrenner III, 
have endorsed such a plan, but many city leaders oppose it, including 
the city council speaker, Peter Vallone, who proposed the referendum. 
``Yankee Stadium is uniquely a public property,'' the judge wrote. 
``And its destiny should be decided by the public.'' City lawyers 
immediately appealed to the Appellate Division of state Supreme Court, 
which granted a stay late Wednesday afternoon. No new court date has 
been set, but the matter requires a fast resolution: the city's Board 
of Elections plans to print its absentee ballots for the November 
election as early as the end of this week. McKeon questioned the mayor's 
creation of a charter revision commission last spring as a shrewd 
but troubling tactic intended solely to thwart the Yankee Stadium 
referendum. The Giuliani administration had maintained that, by law, 
any ballot proposal from a charter commission would prevent a referendum 
on another issue from appearing on the ballot. But McKeon ruled that 
the commission, which the mayor packed with friends and allies, had 
improperly rushed through its mandate to review the entire city Charter, 
only to come up with one proposal, to change a piece of the city's 
campaign finance law. The judge declared the commission's ballot proposal 
to be null and void, effectively creating ballot space for the stadium 
referendum. ``Whether the commission embarked on its work with good 
intentions will never be known,'' McKeon wrote. ``Simply said, the 
urgency to find a proposal to blockade the council's Yankee Stadium 
proposal rendered the work of the commission in 1998 a virtual charade.'' 
Clearly exercised by the 15-page decision, Giuliani denounced McKeon 
as a tool of the Bronx Democratic Party machine, and dismissed his 
ruling as being devoid of objective legal analysis. In particular, 
he said, the judge was wrong in maintaining that the commission was 
required to do a thorough review of the entire Charter. When asked 
whether he was also playing politics when he first appointed the Charter 
Revision Commission, the mayor said: ``You're darn right I was. I'm 
the mayor _ I'm entitled to play politics. But judges are not supposed 
to do that.'' Vallone, who is the Democratic candidate for governor, 
hailed the judge's ruling. ``This is a victory for the people,'' he 
told reporters at Buffalo International Airport. ``It confirms what 
I've always said: that the mayor's commission was a sham.'' Daniel 
DeFrancesco, executive director of the Board of Elections, said it 
planned to begin printing absentee ballots that include the stadium 
referendum by the end of the week unless the appeals court intervenes. 
The Democratic speaker and the Republican mayor have been quarreling 
for most of 1998, primarily because they disagree on how best to handle 
the question of how to keep Steinbrenner from following through on 
his periodic threats to leave Yankee Stadium, which he considers to 
be inadequate and unsafe, once the team's lease ends in 2002. When 
Giuliani proposed that the city help to build a stadium in Manhattan, 
Vallone countered with his proposed referendum. The council speaker's 
move infuriated the mayor on two levels: it stymied his ability to 
negotiate with the team, he said, and was intended purely to increase 
voter turnout for Vallone's gubernatorial bid. Giuliani responded 
with his Charter Commission, which immediately laid out an ambitious 
agenda aimed at coming up with some proposal to amend the Charter 
that would knock off Vallone's referendum. After contentious public 
hearings at which its very purpose was ridiculed, the commission announced 
in August that it was recommending a ballot proposal to prohibit candidates 
from accepting campaign contributions from corporations. The council 
quickly sent Giuliani a message that their fight _ one that has also 
spilled into the city's budget process _ was far from over. In addition 
to overriding the mayor's veto of its stadium referendum and passing 
a campaign finance package of its own, the council filed a lawsuit 
in the Bronx that charged, among other allegations, that that mayor 
had convened the commission for improper reasons. In his decision, 
McKeon addressed only briefly whether a mayor-sponsored Charter question 
legally bumps any referendum from the ballot, which the city's lawyers 
contend is the crux of the matter. Instead, he focused on the Charter 
Commission's ``slapdash approach'' to its responsibilities, and its 
vow to reconvene next year to examine the matters it had set aside 
because of its self-imposed time constraints. McKeon concluded his 
decision with a brief celebration of the 75-year-old Bronx stadium, 
describing it as the home to ``magical memories,'' like the Louis-Schmeling 
fight of 1938 _ and a ``legacy that has been passed down to generations 
of New Yorkers.'' ``Our mayor is able, hands on, and our city has 
benefited from his stewardship,'' the judge wrote. ``However, in the 
unique circumstance where a city is asked to construct a stadium to 
serve the generations of New Yorkers to come, a limitation on the 
powers of elected officials to make that decision is not offensive 
to any constitutional, statutory or common law pronouncement.'' No 
matter how eloquent the judge's ruling may have been, Michael Hess, 
the city's corporation counsel, found it to be ``politically motivated'' 
and wanting in legal analysis. ``Governments and cities are not run 
by popular votes on every subject,'' Hess said. ``There's a proper 
procedure to have matters put on the ballot, and the judge has not 
followed that proper procedure.'' Giuliani was not as restrained in 
his assessment. ``The legal analysis and legal scholarship is nonexistent,'' 
he said, during an early-afternoon news conference in Manhattan. ``I 
think essentially we did appear before the Democratic County Committee 
of the Bronx.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>