<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0466 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tony Gwynn stood outside a batting cage discussing the story line 
of this National League championship series between his San Diego 
Padres and the Atlanta Braves The story line is pitching: In John 
Smoltz, Tom Glavine and Greg Maddux, Atlanta has one of the greatest 
rotations of all time. Gwynn spoke bravely, wisely and realistically 
about what San Diego needed to do during the coming days to win the 
series. No, he would not be intimidated, nor would his team. Coming 
into this series, 302 of his 2,928 hits have come against Atlanta. 
``We faced them 50, 60, 70 times, so you're not in awe,'' he said 
of the Atlanta starters. ``I got about 60 at-bats, 70 at-bats off 
all of them. You can't come into a series like this expecting to just 
shock the world. I can't come in here thinking I'm going to hit four 
or five home runs. I got to take what they give me and try to do something 
with it. They don't give you anything.'' This playoffs series is a 
tale of two diametrically opposed franchises, contemporary baseball 
in a microcosm. Small-market San Diego reached the World Series for 
the first and only time in franchise history in 1984. Atlanta, a larger 
market, has been the National League's dominant team of the '90s. 
Gwynn was a 24-year-old rookie in 1984, completing his first full 
season in the majors. He batted .351 and led San Diego to a pennant 
and the World Series, where the Padres lost to Detroit. Gywnn said 
that if someone had told him then that the Padres wouldn't come close 
to another Series for 14 seasons, he might not have stayed in San 
Diego. ``I felt that we'd find a way to get back in three or four 
years,'' he said. Now at 38, Gwynn is heavier, injured, and the end 
of a career is closing in. The time to win is now. ``With four free 
agents and a $50 million payroll,'' he said, ``the writing is on the 
wall. There is a sense of urgency.'' But there is also a sense of 
urgency for Atlanta; this sense of mission has nothing to do with 
the opponent at hand, nothing really do to with the National League. 
This time Atlanta is not merely dueling for a spot in the World Series. 
This time, it is competing for a place in history. If Atlanta's final 
history were written this instant, it would go down as a great organization 
with outstanding efficiency and a great pitching staff. Atlanta reached 
the National League Championship Series in 1969, 1982, 1991, 1992, 
1993, 1995, 1996 and 1997. Atlanta reached the World Series in 1991 
and lost to Minnesota; in 1992 and lost to Toronto; in 1995 and defeated 
Cleveland and in 1996 when it lost to New York. For Atlanta to be 
regarded as one of the great teams of this century there is one more 
level to reach. But what makes this so tricky is that it depends on 
more than reaching the World Series and winning it. A victory over 
Cleveland will not catapult the Braves into exalted history; they've 
beaten Cleveland. Atlanta needs the Yankees. They need to be affirmed 
by a team that's being regarded as one of the best of all time. Two 
seasons ago, Atlanta took a commanding 2-0 lead over New York; the 
Yankees won the Series, 4 games to 2. Fulton-County Stadium is demolished 
now, but reminders of New York are all over the postseason landscape: 
There's Jim Leyritz, who joined the Padres in June. Leyritz's three-run 
home in the eighth inning of Game 4 of the 1996 Series tied the game 
and led to an 8-6 Yankees victory. Nothing Smoltz, Maddux and Glavine 
will do this week can change that history. Someone kidded Leyritz 
that his home run helped demolish Fulton-County Stadium. ``Game 5 
demolished it,'' he quipped, referring to the Yankees 1-0 victory 
in what was the last game in that stadium. Then there's Leyritz's 
cap, with No. 39 printed on the side in honor of his former Yankees 
teammate Darryl Strawberry. The crushing loss to New York in '96, 
last year's unexpected loss to Florida in the championship series, 
one World Series victory in four attempts: It's an incomplete legacy. 
Back in the early '90s when Atlanta's bloom was fresh, we were thrilled 
by Deion Sanders shuttling between pro football and baseball in Atlanta. 
The Braves were a scrappy, hungry team that excited the imagination, 
satisfied the hunger for something new. Sanders was organic, visceral, 
the Braves were soulful. Today, pitcher-driven Atlanta has never recaptured 
that same scrappy edge and gritty temperament. The team is efficient 
and academic, reliant on Rolls Royce pitching, booming home runs from 
assorted, rotating free agents. ``I think this business-type attitude 
hasn't gotten the job done,'' said Atlanta's Chipper Jones. Said Leyritz: 
``You have to have that extra emotion this time of year. Maybe that 
extra edge is what's missing with them sometimes.'' The franchise 
wants to wash away the bitter taste of 1996, to establish itself as 
one of the great teams of all time. To do so, it must defeat one of 
the great teams of all time. Atlanta needs the Yankees like Muhammad 
Ali needed a menacing Sonny Liston, the way the Joe Namath-led Jets 
needed the Baltimore Colts. In what may be baseball's last great season 
of the century, Atlanta's door to greatness, its road to posterity, 
goes through Yankees Stadium. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>