<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Had Erick Zonca's first feature film been autobiographical, as so 
many French first movies seem to be, it might well have been set in 
New York: a young illegal immigrant, who washes dishes in a Little 
Italy restaurant and sleeps in Washington Square, falls in love with 
a dancer and discovers a different America. Or it could have been 
set on the Paris Left Bank where the same Frenchman, now in his late 
20s, wangles his way into the Sorbonne only to find he understands 
nothing of the course he has chosen. Of course, young movie directors 
often tap their own lives for material because they have known no 
other. But Zonca is now 42 and, in the precocious world of aspiring 
moviemakers, that means he is old. It also means that he has done 
a fair amount of living, enough at least to discover more interesting 
movie subjects than his own version of down-and-out in New York and 
Paris. So perhaps this explains why his acclaimed first film, ``The 
Dreamlife of Angels,'' which closes the New York Film Festival on 
Sunday night, does not feel like a first film. It is, so to speak, 
post-autobiographical. Nonetheless, it (italics)is(end italics) a 
first film in that it came out of nowhere: even in the French movie 
business, few people had heard of Erick Zonca. Until, that is, ``The 
Dreamlife of Angels'' was given a 12-minute ovation at this year's 
Cannes International Film Festival and Elodie Bouchez and Natacha 
Regnier, who play the lead roles, went on to share the festival's 
best actress award. The movie, which cost $2 million, has now paid 
for itself through sales to some 40 countries; it has just opened 
to near-unanimous rave reviews in France; and it is scheduled to be 
released in the United States in early March. ``We went to Cannes 
as an adventure, determined to have a good time, to amuse ourselves,'' 
Zonca recalled in a recent interview in a Paris production office, 
where he was editing his next movie. ``Then it all happened. It was 
the most beautiful possible way of going to Cannes. Something like 
that can only happen once.'' The film's plot is deceptively simple. 
Isa (Ms. Bouchez) arrives with her backpack in an industrial town 
in northern France looking for a friend. She finds work in a dress-making 
factory where she meets Marie (Ms. Regnier), who is house-sitting 
an apartment and offers Isa a place to sleep. At first the two young 
women get on well, even double-dating a pair of motorcyclists-cum-bouncers, 
but their different personalities soon surface. Isa, generous and 
gentle, discovers she is camping in the bedroom of a girl who is in 
a hospital in a coma and immediately starts visiting the girl. Marie, 
insecure and quick-tempered, falls for Chriss (Gregoire Colin), a 
wealthy young philanderer whom she knows to be bad news. When Chriss 
humiliates her, she turns her anger against Isa, who finally decides 
it is time to move on. Where the movie scores, in the view of many 
critics, is in the development of the main characters, not only the 
two young women and Chriss, but also the two soft-hearted bouncers, 
Charly (Patrick Mercado) and Fredo (Jo Prestia). The screenplay, co-written 
by Zonca and Roger Bohbot, was not improvised, yet the movie exudes 
a real-life mood reminiscent of the work of, say, Mike Leigh or John 
Cassavetes. And in this tight-focused world, where emotions constantly 
determine behavior, it is the pretty blonde Marie who rages against 
life, while the boyish Isa, with her mop-top haircut, is at peace 
with her lot. Still, there may be echoes of autobiography in the director's 
creation of two lead characters. Isa, the footloose wanderer, is a 
social outsider; Marie, disturbed and distrustful, is an emotional 
outsider, and Zonca, for most of his life, has felt like an outsider. 
Born into an affluent family of Italian descent in Orleans in the 
north central region of France, Zonca dropped out of school at 16 
and moved to Paris at 17, fantasizing about a career as a screenwriter 
but in practice soon reduced to doing odd jobs. Eventually he signed 
up for a Method-inspired drama course run by two Americans, Blanche 
Salant and Paul Weaver, but that still did not bring him into the 
mainstream. ``We did courses where we were never ready to look for 
work,'' he said. ``We were in a sort of isolated retreat of introspection 
and psychoanalysis, an imaginary American world filled with actors 
like Robert De Niro and Al Pacino. When I tried to write screenplays, 
I even saw Americans playing the roles. That's why I went to the United 
States. I had heard there were courses where foreigners could lose 
their accents. I had this naive dream of becoming an American actor.'' 
It was not to be. In fact, in New York _ at the Bleecker Street Cinema, 
to be exact _ Zonca belatedly discovered European movies. And after 
a richly-varied three-year stay, during which he graduated from the 
kitchen of Umberto's Clam House to the acting courses of the Herbert 
Bergoff Studio, he decided that he could only make movies in France. 
But he also recognized that he still needed an education, so he signed 
up at the Sorbonne to study philosophy. Then, when he saw he was ill-prepared 
for the course, he dropped out and instead attended classes that he 
enjoyed. ``At 30, I concluded that I was a total `has been,' '' he 
noted, ``because I wanted to do cinema and I had absolutely no experience 
in the medium.'' Finally, he found work in television, first as an 
unpaid intern, then as an assistant director helping to make sitcoms 
and documentaries for an independent production company. Realizing 
he could not hope to make a feature film without any experience in 
cinema, he began sending off scripts for short movies to different 
producers until one, Francois Marquis, responded. In 1992, Zonca made 
his first film, ``Rives,'' which did well on the festival circuit, 
as did his second 30-minute short, ``Eternelles.'' The prize money 
for these two then helped finance yet another well received short, 
``Seule,'' and by then Marquis was ready to produce Zonca's first 
feature film. The script for ``The Dreamlife of Angels'' took time 
to come together. The first draft suggested a four-hour movie and 
pursued the story of Isa after she left Marie. Zonca then cut the 
screenplay in half, leaving Isa's post-Marie experiences to form the 
basis of his next film, ``Les Petits Voleurs,'' which was commissioned 
by the French-German cultural television station, Arte. From the story's 
inception, though, he wanted Isa to be played by Ms. Bouchez, 25, 
whose 15 screen roles since 1991 include an award-winning part in 
Andre Techine's ``Wild Reeds.'' ``I was flattered, but I did not like 
the first screenplay,'' she said in a telephone interview. ``I felt 
it was too full of cliches, and the role of Isa was too passive, too 
soft. With time, the script improved, but I still couldn't find the 
link between Erick's shorts, which were so good, and his screenplay. 
Finally, I decided to trust him and to trust myself. And on the first 
day of shooting, I found my voice; I found out how to create Isa, 
how to make her work. After that, it was pure pleasure from start 
to finish.'' Zonca said that once he had persuaded her to cut her 
hair short enough for the part, Ms. Bouchez was a model of professionalism. 
In contrast, he noted, Ms. Regnier, also in her early 20s, had previously 
acted in just one film and was ``more a young actress finding her 
way.'' ``We got on very well, and we also argued all the time,'' Ms. 
Regnier conceded. ``Erick is someone who never lets go, who pushes 
all the way, and that creates tension, but it is very positive tension. 
I prefer to work with someone like that than with someone who doesn't 
seem to care.'' In the end, casting Ms. Bouchez and Ms. Regnier as 
Isa and Marie proved to be one of the triumphs of the film: both actresses 
even admit a resemblance to the roles they play. ``I'm close to Isa 
in her openness to the world and to other people and in her generosity, 
which is a trait that I value a lot,'' Ms. Bouchez said softly. And 
Ms. Regnier offered more sternly: ``It's true that, like Marie, I 
make no concessions to life, I never give way. I have always done 
what I want. There is also a bit of the wild in me.'' France being 
France, of course, some critics here have looked for a social message 
in the film as a story of working-class women rejected by a world 
of materialism. But such talk prompts Zonca only to roll his eyes 
with impatience. ``I didn't want to put in any social message,'' he 
said. ``I just want to make films that tell stories. But there's a 
problem in France. You always have to have a message _ a `discours' 
_ a point of view, or you're in trouble. In the United States, you 
don't have that problem. I had no intention of telling people what 
I think about the working classes. This is simply a film about being 
an outsider.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>