<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government shutdown of a prominent state-run investment company, 
the Guangdong International Trust &AMP; Investment Corp., shows that 
China may finally be getting tough with insolvent financial institutions. 
Although debt problems plagued Guangdong International, the nation's 
second-largest trust and investment company behind the China International 
Trust and Investment Corp., what surprised economists and bankers 
is that the government decided to take decisive action against such 
a well-known institution. China's official media reported that its 
central bank revoked the operating license of Guangdong International, 
also known as Gitic, on Tuesday because it could not repay its debts. 
The Bank of China, one of China's four policy-making banks, was ordered 
to take charge of repaying those liabilities. The size of the debt 
was not made public. Like many Chinese companies, Guangdong International 
operated such a web of subsidiaries and shell companies that it is 
difficult for outsiders to calculate the true size of either its debts 
or assets. In financial terms, the collapse was seen as relatively 
insignificant. Analysts at Salomon Smith Barney in Hong Kong estimated 
that Guangdong International had assets of just $2.8 billion at the 
end of 1997, with nearly $1 billion in foreign debt. Domestic debt 
may have been far larger. What is significant is that until now, it 
had been virtually inconceivable for Beijing to close a prestigious 
investment company like Guangdong International. In the past, state-run 
companies with good connections to the central government have generally 
been able to rely on bailouts, often based on endless debt restructuring. 
But Beijing's leaders have been alarmed at the crisis facing several 
Asian neighbors, which have been swamped by the same kind of financial 
overexposure that plagues many Chinese financial institutions. Although 
China has so far been spared the worst of Asia's crisis, officials 
in Beijing have said they intend to make China's notoriously debt-ridden 
banks and investment companies more accountable. Economists estimate 
that Chinese banks have more than $200 billion in outstanding debt 
to failing state industries that are unlikely ever to repay it. Yet 
without shareholder or market pressure to have a full accounting, 
many of China's banks indefinitely postpone any genuine inventory 
of their creditworthiness. That sort of endless rolling over of debt 
may now finally be changing. A critical but partly hidden factor in 
the fate of Guangdong International has been a political revamping 
in Guangdong Province, beginning early this year. After enjoying breakneck 
development with skimpy regulation in the 1980s and early 1990s, Guangdong 
has recently come under greater scrutiny from Prime Minister Zhu Rongji. 
Zhu traveled to Guangdong repeatedly this year to confront local officials 
about financial irregularities and helped Wang Qishan, a rising star 
in Beijing who headed the China Construction Bank, become deputy governor 
in charge of financial restructuring. Guangdong International was 
set up in 1980 to manage investments on behalf of Guangdong Province, 
the fast-developing region that borders Hong Kong. Its investments 
included the Guangzhou-Shantou railway, power plants in Dongguan and 
the Shenzhen Science and Technology Park. It sold more than $400 million 
of international bonds. In recent years, its heavy exposure to real 
estate in southern China went sour. Like other state-run investment 
and trust companies, it often relied less on creative or strategic 
planning than on local connections. Now, Guangdong International's 
debt repayment has been suspended until January 1999 as Bank of China 
officials determine how to prioritize the debts. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>