<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Signaling an unexpected thaw in a long frosty relationship, Benjamin 
Netanyahu and Yasser Arafat broke bread together for the first time 
on Wednesday, after Netanyahu became the first Israeli prime minister 
to cross over to the Palestinian side of the Erez checkpoint for a 
meeting. It was an impromptu conclusion to Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright's two-day Middle East trip, a last-minute lunch that included 
unprecedented banter and gift-giving between the Likud Party leader 
in his business suit and the Palestinian chairman in his headdress 
and fatigues. Albright, with evident relief, said it indicated a breakthrough 
in a mistrustful relationship between Netanyahu and Arafat, which 
would make it far easier to finalize an interim peace accord at a 
Washington summit meeting to be presided over by President Clinton. 
She announced that the meeting would start on Oct. 15, and the White 
House said it would take place at the Wye Plantation, a conference 
center in rural Maryland. ``As far as my goals for this trip are concerned, 
I am more than satisfied, in fact I am very pleasantly surprised,'' 
Albright said. ``I don't want to do psychobabble, but there really 
was a sense that these two men felt there was a stake in moving forward.'' 
Albright and aides described a progressive easing of the standoff 
between the Israeli and Palestinian leaders over the last two weeks 
in meetings in New York, Washington and here. During these meetings, 
their first face-to-face sessions in over a year, it became clear 
that, at the least, a minimally cordial relationship was a necessary 
prelude to breaking an 18-month stalemate. In a minor breakthrough 
on Wednesday, the Israelis and Palestinians came to an understanding 
on three specific parts of the interim peace agreement, in which Israel 
is to withdraw from another 13 percent of the West Bank in exchange 
for a Palestinian crackdown on terrorism. After three years of stalling, 
they agreed to open a Gaza industrial park near Erez in December. 
They agreed to a set up and abide by an ``anti-incitement committee,'' 
which would hear each side's complaints that the other was fomenting 
hostility. And they agreed to establish ``people-to-people'' programs 
to foster relationships between Israelis and Palestinians. Albright 
said they also ``made significant and substantial progress'' on the 
key issues _ the Israeli redeployment of forces and an institutionalized, 
cooperative mechanism for maintaining security in the region. George 
Tenant, the director of central intelligence, had flown in from Washington 
to help hammer out the security agreement, which was not completed. 
Later, Netanyahu gave a more modest appraisal of the two days' accomplishments, 
saying that they had ``climbed the foothills'' but that there remained 
a ``mountain to scale in Washington.'' Still, he made it clear that 
he considered an agreement to be on the horizon by saying that if 
an accord were reached in Washington, he might open talks on the final 
status of Palestinian-Israeli peace ``on the spot.'' The first step 
toward a new, improved relationship between the Israeli and Palestinian 
leaders began last Sunday in a suite at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel 
in New York. When the men entered that meeting, they held themselves 
stiffly, looked ill at ease and talked indirectly, through negotiators 
and Albright. After a series of subsequent sessions, their ``body 
language'' softened, Albright said. They began talking directly to 
each other, smiling and chatting. On Wednesday, Arafat even gave Netanyahu, 
a cigar aficionado, a present: a box of Cuban cigars. After Netanyahu 
and Albright traveled south from Jerusalem by helicopter, the three-way 
meeting began Wednesday morning on the Israeli side of the Erez checkpoint. 
It was a meeting place rife with the tensions on the negotiating table, 
since Palestinians in Gaza have been locked inside the strip by Israeli 
border closures for three weeks. Some 25,000 workers have been unable 
to report to their jobs in Israel. After more than two hours of discussions, 
Netanyahu suggested ordering sandwiches, and Arafat responded by inviting 
him to lunch at his guest house just over the border in Palestinian-controlled 
Gaza. Sitting around a T-shaped banquet table loaded with platters, 
Arafat, Netanyahu, Albright and a dozen aides dined on shrimp, lamb, 
hummus and a local fish, denise, which they kiddingly called Dennis 
in reference to Dennis Ross, the U.S. peace envoy to the Middle East. 
Albright led a toast to diplomacy, and the three leaders joined hands. 
``I can confirm to you that the food and the cigars were all kosher,'' 
Netanyahu later told Israeli reporters, who had not asked. After the 
lunch Albright couched her optimism with some cautious words. ``I 
wasn't born yesterday and there still are very many hard problems 
out there.'' She described the bottom line of the negotiations as: 
``Nothing is agreed to until everything is agreed to.'' Among the 
things agreed to on Wednesday was the opening of the Gaza industrial 
park, which now has 17 investors and could provide 40,000 jobs once 
developed, according to negotiators. The Israelis have agreed to set 
up a sophisticated scanner that could perform quick security checks 
on commercial containers so that products can move quickly over the 
border. A senior State Department official said an agreement is expected 
within days, too, on an opening date for the Gaza airport, which has 
sat idle since it was completed. Before flying to Egypt on Wednesday 
evening to brief President Hosni Mubarak, Arafat said Albright had 
``done a lot to push the peace process forward.'' But one of his Cabinet 
ministers and a top negotiator, Dr. Nabil Sha'ath, said Tuesday night 
that the progress was not great enough. ``We have nothing but to give 
Netanyahu one more chance, but it might be the last chance,'' he said, 
referring to the Oct. 15 meeting. In an act offensive to the Palestinians, 
Netanyahu traveled on Tuesday night to the Jewish settlement of Ariel 
in the West Bank to celebrate its new status as a city, proclaiming 
it ``a fact, a part of Israel in any final status.'' A senior State 
Department official called this the kind of provocation that could 
sour a deal. At the same time, though, Netanyahu was not only defending 
his intention to hand over more of the West Bank, which right-wing 
members of his political coalition have called grounds to bring down 
his government, but insisting that he should stay in office to finish 
the final status talks. ``One thing we've proven,'' Netanyahu said. 
``We can stand up to every criticism, every pressure. If they think 
someone else could lead the negotiations to final-status agreements, 
if they think the left should do it, well ...'' Before leaving Israel 
for Brussels, Belgium, Albright said that she felt President Clinton 
could help push the leaders toward a comprehensive agreement. ``He 
has a very special ability to work with people who have different 
problems and also to put himself in their shoes,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>