<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Blues in the night. A purple heart for the lovelorn. Peter Eisenman's 
new design for a Parisian telephone kiosk is oddly poignant, coming 
from an architect noted for such cold-blooded formal explorations 
as the Wexner Center for the Arts in Columbus, Ohio, and that city's 
convention center, with its metal roof that undulates like a bed of 
snakes. Here, Eisenman seems inspired by the prospect of creating 
a pavilion for two in the capital city of romance. (April in Paris.) 
But the two callers that the kiosk can accommodate could be strangers. 
They could be getting busy signals. (April, the cruelest month.) Or 
a bad connection. (Allo? Allo?) Here's an alfresco setting for the 
Poulenc-Cocteau opera ``La Voix Humaine.'' Commissioned by J.C. Decaux, 
the French firm best known for deluxe sidewalk pay toilets, the kiosk 
is a prototype being considered for placement throughout the city. 
Designs are also being submitted by Norman Foster, Jean Nouvel, Charles 
Gwathmey, Robert Stern, James Stewart Polshek, and Tod Williams and 
Billie Tsien. A decision is expected in about six weeks, and eventually 
Decaux plans to distribute 5,000 kiosks, perhaps in a mix of designs. 
Eisenman proposes to use a carbon-reinforced plastic fabric, similar 
to that used for bulletproof vests. Designed on a computer, the enclosure 
_ made from a single swirling, folded plane _ would be anchored to 
a metal column that supports two phones and a panel for illuminated 
advertising. Seating would be provided for one caller, or two close 
pals. The kiosk's skin would vary in opacity from open mesh to solid 
canopy, the latter acting as a rain shield. This is not the first 
time that Eisenman has toyed with the conventions of coupledom. In 
1972, his experimental House VI, in Cornwall, Conn., had a slot in 
the floor of the master bedroom that divided the bed in two. Philosophically, 
Eisenman is often drawn to the idea of collapsing dualisms (inside 
and outside; site and surroundings) into a fuzzy state of in-between. 
That bent is translated here into a form in which seating blossoms 
into roof, and enclosure dissolves into the perfume of the blue hour. 
What a sensual beauty-freak Eisenman is turning out to be. In his 
most recent work, he has given up his reliance on the Cartesian grid 
in favor of softer contours that billow, swell and undulate. With 
the kiosk, this new approach has produced an object almost floral 
in effect, perhaps a newly bred lavender rose that tapers on one side 
to a sharp, thorny point _ a reminder that pain is one of love's glories. 
Like many theoretically inclined architects, Eisenman has been reluctant 
to acknowledge the link between formalism and beauty, but his work 
is starting to do it for him. He calls himself a critical architect, 
an antagonist to convention. But beauty has always offered the most 
powerful critique of the difference between life as it is and as it 
should be. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>