<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0099 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A group of communications, software and financial services companies 
plans to announce an alliance Tuesday aimed at creating standards 
for speech recognition that will push electronic commerce and the 
Internet beyond the boundaries of the personal computer, potentially 
making it accessible to anyone with a telephone. The announcement, 
to be made at an industry trade show in New York, is intended to expand 
the ability to perform Internet transactions or retrieve data from 
the World Wide Web by using speech-recognition technology to translate 
spoken words into data commands transmitted via the Web. The companies, 
which include Motorola Inc., SAP AG, Visa International, Broadvision 
Inc., and Nuance Communications, a unit of SRI International, describe 
their effort as V-Commerce and argue that telephone access will break 
down the last barrier remaining between the mass of consumers and 
the Internet. Currently access to the Internet is limited to those 
with personal computers and Internet capability, but increasingly 
executives in both the computer and communications industries envision 
a new Internet platform that will be controlled by voice and will 
display information on a small portable screen. In the last year speech 
recognition technologies have improved significantly, making it possible 
for a number of companies to begin deploying systems that answer questions 
for phone call and package routing, stock trading, banking, airline 
reservations and other commercial transactions. Now the companies 
are making an effort to integrate voice systems with Internet and 
corporate data bases. The new drive toward integration will make it 
possible for consumers to pose questions by telephone and then receive 
data in a variety of different ways, including by phone, portable 
devices such as pagers and cell phones, or in the Web browser of their 
personal computers. ``We see voice recognition making tremendous advances,'' 
said Todd Chaffee, executive vice president for corporate development 
and alliances at Visa. ``Voice technology is going to lead to a massive 
extension of electronic commerce beyond those with PC's.'' In the 
future, according to the alliance executives, it will be increasingly 
simple to use a telephone to make a query such as ``tell me the flights 
from San Francisco to New York leaving tomorrow.'' The answer to that 
question could then be immediately spoken by phone, or displayed on 
a pager or in a computer Web browser. Currently, gaining access to 
the same information via a Web browser alone can require as many as 
15 mouse clicks and take up to three minutes. Nuance is one of a small 
group of companies, including Applied Language Technologies, Lernout 
&AMP; Hauspie Speech Products NV, Dragon Systems and the IBM Corp., 
that are now developing basic speech recognition technologies that 
are speaker-independent and do not require training. This is a significant 
advance and is permitting wider deployment of voice applications, 
such as recent Nuance systems that permit call routing at Sears, Roebuck 
or stock information at Schwab. Both Visa, the credit card processor, 
and Motorola are investors in Nuance and both companies are moving 
to deploy both new services and products that are based on the new 
voice technologies. Visa executives said the company had created prototypes 
of five voice-based financial services including credit card activation, 
lost and stolen card replacement, travel planning, voice banking and 
bill payment. The services will be available commercially next year. 
Motorola executives said the communications company was working to 
create new Internet standards that would make speech extensions to 
standard Internet services simple to implement. The company recently 
introduced a new voice Internet standard called Voice Markup Language, 
or VoxML, to allow software developers to add speech to their Web 
applications. Because VoxML applications can be deployed on standard 
Web servers, the company maintains it is straightforward to add the 
technology. ``Motorola looks at this area as a fundamental element 
of our strategy,'' said Maria Martinez, vice president and general 
manager of Motorola's Internet division. One of the strengths of the 
VoxML standard is that it would permit responses to voice queries 
to be displayed on a variety of existing Web devices, from pagers 
to browsers. ``So far, electronic commerce has been constrained by 
the PC,'' said Ron Croen, Nuance's chief executive officer. ``We're 
intent on making the audience larger by an order of magnitude.'' NYT-10-05-98 
2007EDT 
</TEXT>
</DOC>