<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0172 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For information on everything from black-owned businesses to hip-hop, 
Internet users can choose from a growing number of Web sites aimed 
at African-Americans. Derrick Brown, a graduate student at the Georgia 
Institute of Technology in Atlanta, has been visiting these sites 
for several years, mainly for news on topics of particular interest 
to African-Americans. ``Basically they present a perspective and news 
you are not going to see every week'' at other sites, Brown said. 
Even so, he became frustrated four years ago while trying to keep 
up with the growing number of such Web sites. ``In the early days 
of the Web, I spent a lot of aimless time wandering and really didn't 
know where the stuff I wanted was,'' recalled Brown, 28, an electrical 
engineering student. So he helped create the Universal Black Pages, 
a directory to keep abreast of African-American sites (www.ubp.com). 
``We did just what the guys at Yahoo did,'' he said of the directory, 
which he and his partners created initially as a project of the association 
for black graduate students at Georgia Tech. The directory has grown 
larger each year, reflecting a surge in the number of sites focused 
on African-American interests. ``We take in, on average, about 150 
submitted sites a month,'' Brown said. The directory initially listed 
800 sites and now includes thousands, he said. Wendy Coleman, 30, 
a college administrator at North Carolina State University in Raleigh, 
has used black Web sites to find information on historically black 
colleges and even to hunt for a black-owned bridal shop to provide 
a dress for her forthcoming wedding. ``I think there is a need for 
African-American Web sites,'' said Ms. Coleman, who is black. ``Many 
of our issues, concerns and needs are just not addressed in mainstream 
America. A lot of times I'm looking for material and data targeted 
at education that deals with African-Americans.'' While she was not 
able to find the wedding gown she wanted on the Web, she said she 
may go on line to find a black-owned bed and breakfast where she can 
spend her first day as a married woman. ``I'm an information junkie,'' 
Ms. Coleman said, ``and that is a place where so many different avenues 
of information exist.'' Indeed, the Internet has a wide range of black-oriented 
sites, like those of the National Association of Black Scuba Divers 
(www.nabsdivers.org) and the Young Black Entrepreneurs (www.ybe-inc.com). 
There are online editions of Ebony magazine (www.ebonymag.com), Essence 
(www.essence.com) and Black Enterprise (www.blackenterprise.com), 
and a site for black sports enthusiasts at urbansportsnetwork.com. 
There is even a site for black golfers, sponsored by the Minority 
Golf Association of America (www.mgaa.com). Over all, black-oriented 
sites have a lot of the same information, although Net Noir, for one, 
has worked hard to be more comprehensive and is designed so well that 
it stands apart from the pack. Net Noir and similar sites seem to 
have less advertising than general-interest sites, making them heavy 
on house ads. The big businesses that do advertise tend to pop up 
on most of the sites, And the advertisements from those companies 
_ including Hewlett-Packard and Microsoft _ generally promote their 
fair-hiring practices and highlight black employees. With so many 
sites out there to explore, Soul Search (www.soulsearch. net), ``the 
search engine for the world's people of color,'' puts you on autopilot 
as you travel the Web. Soul Search breaks sites down into useful categories 
like art, religion and health, and includes What's New, What's Cool 
and Top 10 areas. The site's listings aren't extensive but appear 
to be growing. Soul Search is an easy way to find out what is available 
among black-oriented sites. WWW.BLACKVOICES.COM A site with something 
for everyone is Black Voices, which invites visitors to ``make a little 
noise yourself.'' It is an ideal place to go for news of current events. 
The information is timely and interesting, with color photos and graphics. 
For instance, the site recently included an article on the income 
gains and decline in poverty levels among African-Americans. And it 
ran a tribute to Florence Griffith Joyner, the world's fastest woman, 
who died last month of what appeared to be a heart seizure. Visitors 
could leave messages for her family, view pictures of her in her Olympic 
glory and get a list of books about her. Black Voices features comprehensive 
lists for anyone looking for specific clubs and activities, including 
sites for black entrepreneurs, poetry groups, a cooking club and a 
group for ``big beautiful women.'' Visitors can join chat rooms and 
use message boards. A page called Sister 2 Sister proclaims, ``There 
are some things that brothers will just never get, which is why this 
one is for ladies only.'' The cooking club page, called the Stove 
Top, greets viewers with a note that says: ``This area is for all 
you gourmet cooks, barbecue legends and folks that just plain 'ole 
know how to burn. Share and exchange recipes from your favorite African, 
Caribbean, American or any other cultural dishes you like.'' Unfortunately, 
there are not many recipes listed. Two that were available were for 
banana cake, made with mashed bananas and buttermilk, and for polenta 
with artichokes. For visitors who are more into careers than cooking, 
a Career Center lets them post resumes for review by prospective employers. 
Another interactive section is an online auction where visitors can 
buy or sell a wide range of items from toys to vacations. ``This is 
the place where buyers and sellers have the ability to wheel and deal 
from the comfort of their own home,'' the site says. A recent list 
of merchandise up for grabs included black dolls, Civil War memorabilia 
and even a hotel. Visitors were also trading Sammy Sosa and Mark McGwire 
baseball cards, computers and 20 acres of land. Participants are given 
starting prices, the amount bid so far for items on the block and 
the length of time the auction will run. This site is easy to navigate, 
with simple, colorful icons that lead the user through the options. 
So whether you want an update on your horoscope or on the political 
climate in Congo, this site truly represents a range of black voices. 
WWW.BUPPIE.COM This site aimed at ``buppies'' _ black urban professionals 
_ is not as snooty as it sounds. There is actually a surprising amount 
of useful information at Buppies on Line. But the site's creators, 
who use the slogan ``Bringing black America together in cyberspace,'' 
are mindful of what the first ``p'' in buppies stands for. A banner 
on the home page advertises the Buppies Online Resume Databank, a 
service that allows users to submit and edit their resumes in an online 
database that companies can peruse for potential employees. It's difficult 
to gauge the databank as a job-searching tool: a feature that would 
show users a list of participating corporations is not yet running. 
The emphasis on professionalism is carried through to other sections 
of the site. The education page features articles on scholastic software 
for children and on preparing for college exams. On the sports page 
however, the professional tone starts to wilt: an article on golf, 
predicated on the success of Tiger Woods, concludes with an apparently 
irony-free discussion of how women can pursue promising mates on the 
links. Acting helpless, according to this article, is a sure tactic: 
``No self-respecting black man can resist a damsel in distress.'' 
Still, there is plenty of good information on the site, and it is 
organized in a way that is easy to navigate. There is some lighter 
stuff here, too, like a list of vacation spots _ bed-and-breakfasts, 
spas, resorts, _ with black owners and operators, and a calendar of 
this year's high-profile black college football games that includes 
useful tourist information for all the games' home cities. Elsewhere, 
Buppies on Line tackles headier topics like the question of whether 
the Social Security reserve should be invested in stocks and bonds 
in addition to government securities. Clearly, such topics affect 
all Americans, but finding them here may increase the likelihood that 
more African-Americans will read about them. The flaw here is timeliness. 
Buppies on Line hasn't been updated since early August, and many of 
the articles have been out of date much longer than that. The Social 
Security article, for example, shares the screen with features on 
subjects that include Jesse Jackson's Wall Street conference (which 
was held in January), Roger Ferguson Jr.'s nomination to the Federal 
Reserve Board (which happened last November) and the announcement 
of an urban renewal program by Robert Reich (before he resigned as 
Labor secretary in November 1996). Even some of the more current information 
seemed forced into categories that don't quite fit. This past summer, 
for example, under Issues Affecting Us, there was an article in about 
President Clinton's top Secret Service agent being forced to testify 
before the grand jury in the Monica S. Lewinsky matter. First of all, 
the account never clearly stated whether the agent is black, which 
is relevant only because the article was included on a black-oriented 
Web site. More to the point, the site never addressed the issue of 
how this article would affect African-Americans. WWW.MOSAICBOOKS.COM 
This literary site, could, at first glance, pass for the black Amazon.com 
of the Internet, and it is in fact an associate of the Amazon site. 
Here you can find books _ albeit a limited number _ by black and Hispanic 
authors. There are descriptions and prices for some of the latest 
fiction by black authors, like ``Milk in My Coffee'' by Eric Jerome 
Dickey, about an interracial relationship, and the ``The Store of 
a Million Items: Stories'' by Michelle Cliff, about the author's Caribbean-American 
heritage. The Book of the Month is a useful feature that suggests 
to visitors some of the better books by black authors, though serious 
readers will probably have already read many of the selections. The 
choice for October is ``Beloved,'' for which the author and Nobel 
laureate Toni Morrison won a 1988 Pulitzer Prize. September's selection 
was ``Invisible Man,'' the novel that established Ralph Ellison as 
a literary talent. Over all, though, serious bookworms should not 
hope for too much from this site. The problem is that the it could 
be so much more. Mosaicbooks.com bills itself as a showcase for ``the 
latest in black and Hispanic literature,'' so beyond the Book of the 
Month picks, you won't find much of the classic work of authors like 
James Baldwin and Langston Hughes. Most of the books the site lists 
cannot be purchased directly from the site. ``Preview the books of 
your choice, then go to your favorite independent bookstore and purchase 
the book,'' visitors are told. Those books that are also carried by 
Amazon _ look for the ``our price'' information at the end of the 
book description _ can be ordered by clicking on the book's cover, 
which takes you to its page at Amazon. The site also includes a plug 
for the Mosaic literary magazine, including a limited-time offer of 
a free book on tape with your subscription. WWW.NETNOIR.COM One of 
the coolest African-American-oriented sites is Net Noir, which calls 
itself ``the black network.'' According to its mission statement, 
the site aims to be ``the No. 1 black interactive online community 
in the world.'' A lofty goal, but the creators of this site come as 
close as any to pulling it off. Viewers can get lost in this site 
and never feel the need for a road map. It has everything: a gospel-music 
area, news and chats, a monthly travel feature on preferred destinations 
and daily national and international news. There is an events calendar, 
celebrity interviews, book reviews, professional networking opportunities 
and online shopping that points visitors toward black-owned businesses. 
A daily spotlight on Net Noir club members is basically a dating service, 
complete with color photos.page says. A recently featured bachelor 
from New York proclaimed in his profile: ``I am very outspoken and 
believe in keeping things very real. I only do to others as I want 
them to do to me.'' Visitors who somehow found the declaration appealing 
could click on his e-mail address to let fate, as it were, take matters 
from there. There are plenty of links to other black-oriented Web 
sites here. Net Noir is user-friendly, with a lively display and catchy 
headlines to guide the viewer. The site looks a little busy, but that 
can be excused because of the amount of great information that is 
packed into it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>