<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0313 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The governing party edged closer Wednesday to injecting massive amounts 
of money into the Japanese banking system, and that prospect sent 
investors rushing into markets with greatly improved hopes of an economic 
recovery. The Liberal Democratic Party introduced legislation to enhance 
the capital base of banks that are sound, but weakly capitalized. 
The legislation, which would add to a bank-rescue package approved 
last week, provides 10 trillion yen, or nearly $80 billion, in taxpayers' 
money to recapitalize the Japanese banks, with an option to provide 
more. ``We realized we should hurry, though it doesn't mean that we 
can pass any bill no matter what its content,'' said Chikara Sakaguchi, 
deputy head of the New Peace Party, a newly pivotal player in the 
opposition group. That party and another small one now seem close 
to pooling their votes with those of the Liberal Democrats to support 
the measure, ensuring passage. Encouraged by the prospects of the 
Liberal Democrats' greater influence, the benchmark Nikkei average 
of 225 shares soared 803.97 points, or 6.2 percent, to 13,825.61, 
with the index logging its second-largest single-day gain of the year 
in a rally that helped push markets higher throughout Asia. Just last 
week, the stock market tumbled to its lowest level in nearly 13 years. 
Over the weekend, Japan's financial leaders painted a picture of gloom 
for American and foreign officials in Washington. In one of his most 
outspoken remarks, Masaru Hayami, the governor of the Bank of Japan, 
told Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin that Japan's top banks are short 
of capital and that taxpayers' money would be necessary to strengthen 
them. Hayami was criticized by Japanese bankers, including Satoru 
Kiishi, head of the nation's banking association, who said that he 
was ``deeply worried'' that the remarks could ``further erode confidence'' 
in Japan's banking system. But many analysts say that boosting the 
capital of the banking system is crucial to financial stability and 
ultimately, economic recovery. ``First and foremost, the policy priority 
is to recapitalize the banking system,'' James Fiorillo, a banking 
analyst at ING Barings in Tokyo, said. ``They can worry about the 
pure market principle later.'' Many analysts, politicians and bankers 
say that Hayami's remarks, along with those by Finance Minister Kiichi 
Miyazawa, appear to have been cleverly staged to inspire worry among 
the opposition parties and force them to buckle to the demands of 
the Liberal Democratic Party. Analysts also say that even if Hayami's 
remarks were scripted, they may reflect a new sense of urgency among 
government and central bank officials. Though the government has warned 
about the severity of Japan's recession _ it now forecasts the economy 
will shrink by 1.8 percent in the fiscal year ending March 1999 _ 
politicians bickered for months over what to do about it. But last 
week, when the Nikkei average plunged below 13,000, banking officials 
appear to have gotten nervous because of the impact that lower stock 
prices have on the capital bases of Japanese banks. As of the end 
of March, the most recent statistics offered by the Bank of Japan, 
all Japanese banks technically met the capital adequacy requirements 
set forth by the Bank for International Settlements. Under Bank for 
International Settlements guidelines, the falling stock prices did 
not have an impact on the Japanese banks, which are still suitably 
capitalized. But that is reassuring only for those who focus on accounting 
rules that permit the banks to value stock portfolios at cost, and 
in reality the declining stock market clearly meant that banks had 
less padding. That seems to be the concern that Hayami tried to raise 
in Washington, and it is also of concern to investors. ``The markets 
were worried about bank failures, about a massive banking crisis that 
would envelop all the banks and sink the market,'' said Craig O. Chudler, 
a strategist at Salomon Smith Barney in Tokyo. He added that the rebound 
was encouraging, but that government officials might not do enough 
to make it last. ``They may be preventing a meltdown, but they're 
not promoting growth,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>