<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia insisted in talks with 
the American envoy Richard Holbrooke that he had ordered enough forces 
out of Kosovo in the last few days to avert a threatened NATO attack, 
an American official said here Wednesday night. But the official said 
that because of the rotation of Serbian forces in and out of Kosovo 
it was not possible to know whether the movements Milosevic described 
were a ``net outflow or not.'' The withdrawal of the extra army and 
police units that Milosevic sent to Kosovo to put down an insurgency 
by ethnic Albanian separatists is at the heart of Washington's demands 
as it pushes for NATO to be given the final authority to use force 
against Milosevic. ``They claim they are returning to pre-crisis numbers,'' 
the official said. ``We need to know that.'' Holbrooke left here Wednesday 
night after his talks with Milosevic, the man with whom he sealed 
the Bosnia peace agreement, stretched over three days. Holbrooke and 
the U.S. official stressed that the talks were difficult but declined 
to offer any specific detail on where the differences lay. The U.S. 
official acknowledged that the diplomatic monitoring mission, whose 
U.S., Russian and European military experts travel around Kosovo, 
reported that for the sixth day Wednesday they had not seen any significant 
military action in the province. As Holbrooke left, a number of embassies 
made preparations to evacuate families and nonessential staff. The 
chief concern, diplomats said, was not cruise missiles' hitting embassies 
or diplomats' homes but the danger that diplomats and their families 
could be taken hostage. Several embassies, including the Americans', 
were organizing convoys of cars for their staff and dependents that 
were scheduled to leave Belgrade on Thursday and head north toward 
Hungary. In downtown Belgrade, Serbs started to stock up on survival 
essentials such as candles and canned goods, and many people said 
they were angry and nervous. According to a Serb radio station, Serbian-language 
programs of the BBC, Voice of America, Radio Free Europe and Deutsche 
Welle will be banned as long as there is a threat of NATO action. 
The likelihood of a threatened NATO attack against Yugoslavia seemed 
to seesaw all day. NATO officials said Germany's new government had 
to get parliamentary approval for a German endorsement of the use 
of force against NATO. In Israel, where Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright was winding up a visit, her spokesman, James Rubin, said, 
``Nobody is in a rush to use force.'' And in London a meeting of the 
so-called contact group of countries that monitor the Balkans was 
scheduled for Thursday by the British Foreign Office, canceled and 
then rescheduled after Albright said she wanted to attend. A Western 
diplomat who has been involved in developments in Belgrade and at 
NATO headquarters in Brussels in the last few days said that the situation 
was so fluid that his prediction changed from minute to minute on 
whether air strikes would take place or not. The diplomat said that 
despite a drumbeat of statements from Washington about using force 
against Serbia for its crackdown on ethnic Albanian civilians, every 
effort was being made to avoid air strikes. And as uncertainties remained 
over how a consensus on NATO force would be reached, Holbrooke's encounters 
with Milosevic over Kosovo appeared to be different in tone and direction 
than the meetings the two men had over settling the war in Bosnia. 
First, diplomats said that Holbrooke, who thrives on controlling a 
situation, was not in charge to the same degree as he was in the Bosnia 
talks. He came as a messenger for President Clinton to tell Milosevic 
about what he had to do comply with a U.N. resolution calling on him 
to withdraw his forces and encourage refugees to return. But he also 
had to calibrate his discussion with the mood at NATO, the diplomats 
said. Second, Holbrooke has been engaged in Kosovo on an on-again, 
off-again basis. He tried to broker a settlement between politicians 
representing the majority ethnic Albanian population of Kosovo and 
Milosevic in May and June but then turned his attention to other things. 
Finally, Holbrooke has said that a solution for Kosovo is more complex 
than in Bosnia, where he was able to negotiate with the heads of sovereign 
countries. Because Kosovo is a Serbian province, outside intervention 
is harder to justify. Holbrooke recently described the bind that the 
West finds itself in. ``The core of the problem is that the Serbian 
behavior has been outrageous and unjustifiable but the Western nations 
do not support Albanian independence,'' he said. ``And finally there 
is no Albanian leadership for negotiations.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>