<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0434 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton on Wednesday undertook 
the delicate job of persuading wavering Democrats to support the president 
on the vote set for Thursday to authorize a broad impeachment inquiry 
without actually pleading for their votes. This was not a typical 
congressional vote on which the White House could sway votes with 
threats or promises. It was, instead, a moment of constitutional and 
political anguish not only for the president but also for dozens of 
House Democrats whose own political futures may rest on their impeachment 
vote. At the White House Wednesday morning, Mrs. Clinton told a group 
of two dozen freshman representatives that she understood the difficulty 
Thursday's vote posed for many Democratic House members facing close 
re-election races. ``She made it very clear that each member should 
make his own decision and do whatever they feel is the right thing 
to do,'' said Rep. Marion Berry, D-Ark. ``I didn't detect any effort 
or intention on her part to change anybody's mind.'' Berry said he 
had not decided on whether to vote for the Republican resolution. 
In public comments and private discussions with lawmakers, the president, 
the first lady and senior White House officials said the president 
would neither seek to punish Democrats who voted to initiate impeachment 
proceedings nor try to reward those who stood by him. But they encouraged 
House members to support a Democratic plan to limit the scope and 
duration of any impeachment investigation. The president, conceding 
the virtual certainty he will become only the third president to face 
the possibility of impeachment, assured lawmakers that he intended 
to cooperate with the House Judiciary Committee when it begins its 
inquiry next month. Clinton has returned telephone calls on the impeachment 
matter from several Democratic House members over the past several 
days and has initiated a handful of calls himself, White House aides 
said. Mrs. Clinton met with freshman Democrats, and Vice President 
Al Gore has also spoken with wavering lawmakers, officials said. ``This 
is not an all-out lobbying campaign like a budget vote or a major 
effort we've done on other legislation,'' said Rahm Emanuel, a senior 
presidential adviser. ``This doesn't match up to that. But we are 
talking to individual members about their concerns.'' Another White 
House aide, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that the president 
could not try to strong-arm votes using the typical tools of persuasion 
_ budget goodies, offers of fund-raising help or support for pet legislation. 
Clinton, he added, has not enjoyed good relations with House Democrats 
since 1993, when the president's reversals on budget and tax bills 
left many House Democrats feeling betrayed. White House officials, 
trying to lower expectations about what is likely to be a bitter defeat 
for the president, say they expect that as many as 80 Democrats may 
vote for the Republican impeachment plan, far more defections than 
Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill are predicting. ``They really were 
hoping that somehow they could hold most Democrats on this vote, but 
they're really not going to be able to do that,'' said an outside 
adviser to the White House. ``It isn't going to happen, and that's 
something they have to adjust to.'' In private conversations with 
several dozen lawmakers, the president and Mrs. Clinton, as well as 
Gore and top White House aides, have argued that the impeachment process 
has been excessively partisan and fundamentally unfair. They repeat 
the position that nothing in the report from the Whitewater independent 
counsel, Kenneth Starr, warrants removing the president from office. 
The president and his lieutenants assured lawmakers Wednesday that 
the White House would not hold it against them if they deserted the 
president to save their own skins. Joe Lockhart, the White House press 
secretary, said that the politically wounded president ``is not in 
a position to dictate or compel'' a vote against the Republican measure 
authorizing an open-ended impeachment inquiry. ``My sense is that 
if you hold this thing anywhere below 50 you're doing OK,'' said Leon 
Panetta, a former White House chief of staff and Democratic member 
of Congress. Panetta said he was urging the White House to accept 
a large number of defections if they improved the Democrats' re-election 
prospects. ``It's better to have that Democrat survive in that office 
so that he's around'' to vote against actual articles of impeachment 
if and when they are approved by the Judiciary Committee, he said. 
One such Democrat in a close re-election contest is freshman Rep. 
Ellen Tauscher of California. She said she had spoken to the president 
and Erskine Bowles, the White House chief of staff, about Clinton's 
willingness to cooperate with an impeachment investigation if one 
were authorized. ``It's clear there is going to be an inquiry,'' Ms. 
Tauscher said Wednesday. ``I wanted to get a sense of what the White 
House's intentions were as far as cooperating. He gave a very favorable 
impression. I took it to mean he would be cooperative.'' One former 
Democratic congressman, lobbying on the president's behalf, described 
his pitch this way: ``I'm not trying to tell you what your district 
wants _ you know that better than anyone. But the Republicans are 
incapable of running this fairly, and the lower we can keep the Democratic 
vote, the stronger position we will be in when the public gets sick 
of their witch hunt.'' Rep. Carolyn McCarthy, D-N.Y., said that despite 
pleas from the White House and its surrogates, she would probably 
vote with the Republicans to authorize the impeachment investigation. 
``I'm not thrilled about how the Republicans have made this open-ended,'' 
Ms. McCarthy said, ``but I believe the process has to be moved forward.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>