<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Harvey Lichtenstein, who took the Brooklyn Academy of Music from an 
imperiled relic three decades ago to one of the world's beacons of 
avant-garde music, theater, opera and dance, will step down this summer 
as president and executive producer, officials are to announce Thursday. 
Lichtenstein, whose 31-year leadership often draws comparisons with 
Joseph Papp's tenure at the widely influential Public Theater, will 
stay on as a consultant. He will work primarily on two major projects, 
a new four-screen cinema that opens in November and a redevelopment 
plan for the area around the 90-year-old academy building in the Fort 
Greene section of Brooklyn. But Lichtenstein said that he had already 
started handing over power to Karen Brooks Hopkins, who will assume 
his title of president, and Joseph Melillo, who will assume his title 
of executive producer. The transition is scheduled for July 1. Lichtenstein 
said he wanted more time for reading and travel, that it was time 
to turn the Brooklyn Academy over to younger leadership, and that 
he had no desire to linger on, hovering behind the curtain as the 
academy's guiding spirit. ``I'm not going to have the job of running 
this institution,'' said Lichtenstein, a 69-year-old Brooklyn native 
and former dancer, whose tenure is synonymous with the careers of 
many of the most acclaimed innovators of recent decades, including 
Philip Glass, Robert Wilson, Peter Brook, Merce Cunningham and Laurie 
Anderson. ``We've talked about me doing some special assignments outside 
the day-to-day running of the institution, but I need to do that and 
stay out of people's hair. I've got to. If I can't, I've just got 
to leave.'' Lichtenstein is being replaced by his two chief lieutenants, 
both of whom have long associations with the academy. Ms. Hopkins, 
currently executive vice president and chief operating officer, has 
been there since 1979. She will be in charge of financial, fund-raising 
and operations. Melillo, currently producing director, will take over 
creative control of programming. Except for a brief hiatus in the 
early 1990s, he has headed the Brooklyn Academy's Next Wave Festival 
since its inception in 1983. Lichtenstein said the three had worked 
together for so long, he had no qualms about the transition, but the 
news jolted many admirers. ``When I heard it, I had to sit down,'' 
said choreographer Bill T. Jones, whose ``We Set Out Early ... Visibility 
Was Poor'' had its debut at the academy on Tuesday as part of this 
year's Next Wave Festival. ``It's like my whole professional career 
is defined by work he's been a part of,'' Jones said. ``The great 
thing about Harvey is that he always wants your most notorious work. 
Harvey always gets excited by what you're excited about. He'll say 
no, but he'll say it with a smile. And he says yes at all the right 
times.'' The Brooklyn Academy of Music was founded in 1861. After 
its original Brooklyn Heights home burned down, it moved into its 
current neo-Italianate building, which it built in 1908. In its prime 
it was host to such artists as Enrico Caruso, Isadora Duncan and Arturo 
Toscanini. But as Brooklyn declined, so did the academy. When Lichtenstein 
arrived, it was owned by the city and was presenting a slapdash array 
of events while it was rented out for karate classes and a private 
boys high school. There was talk of razing it and turning it into 
a tennis court. Lichtenstein said that at the beginning he didn't 
exactly have a plan for turning the institution around but that he 
did have a guiding instinct. ``I knew, and I knew it instinctively, 
that in order for BAM to survive it would have to establish an identity, 
one that was strong and distinctive,'' said Lichtenstein, whose blaring 
ties, angular features and bristling eyebrows led one critic to describe 
his looks as ``a German Expressionist's idea of an American gangster.'' 
``So I had an instinct and a couple of mentors. I knew it needed to 
have its own singularity. But how to do it? I tested the waters here 
and there to see what made sense, what would carry the idea forward,'' 
he said. His plan for doing that was a stretch, to say the least. 
Lichtenstein turned his attention to the avant-garde, figuring that 
no one in New York was doing it in a big way and that it was the only 
way to create an identity that would lure a Manhattan audience over 
the bridge to Brooklyn. In his first season he booked Alban Berg's 
atonal ``Lulu,'' performed by Sarah Caldwell's American National Opera 
company, and gave Merce Cunningham's maverick dance company its first 
major New York season. Soon he presided over the return from European 
exile of Julian Beck's Living Theater, and offered groundbreaking 
works by Twyla Tharp, Jerzy Grotowski and Robert Wilson as well as 
Peter Brook's landmark production of ``A Midsummer Night's Dream.'' 
It was not easy going. ``We did a lot of things where no one came,'' 
he said. ``Merce Cunningham used to play in the opera house, which 
seats 2,000 people, and 400, 500 people would show up. It drove me 
nuts. There's nothing more depressing to come to a house and know 
that you've got an extraordinary artist there, and see it only a quarter 
full.'' Some of the setbacks were permanent. Perhaps Lichtenstein's 
biggest disappointment was an attempt in the late 1970s to create 
a theater repertory company modeled after European ventures like the 
Royal Shakespeare Company. It lasted two seasons and left a financial 
hole that took several seasons to fill. But Lichtenstein did succeed 
in building an identity, an audience and an international profile. 
And he skillfully developed an institution, with strengths in fund-raising 
and marketing to build on the adventurous fare. A breakthrough came 
with the first Next Wave Festival in 1983, which became a major annual 
event. But Lichtenstein said he first felt convinced that his vision 
would work a few years earlier. ``In 1981, we did Philip Glass' opera 
`Satyagraha,' about Gandhi's early years as a lawyer in South Africa,'' 
he said. ``We were really nervous about its drawing power, and I remember 
how stunned we were when we did five performances at the opera house, 
and they were all sold out. It was then that we realized the audiences 
had caught up to the work we were championing.'' Melillo and Ms. Hopkins, 
interviewed separately, each offered the identical explanation for 
Lichtenstein's success: his willingness to take risks. But it was 
both his artistic vision and his personal qualities that endeared 
him to artists. ``Harvey's very smart and very kind, and that's a 
rare combination,'' said performance artist Laurie Anderson. ``He's 
very, I hate the word, but it's the only one I can think of, nurturing. 
A lot of people feel a tremendous amount of loyalty to him because 
they feel comfortable there. He has his temper, but his personality 
and his adventurous sense about the events he puts on, have allowed 
him to play a totally unique role.'' Lichtenstein is not gone yet. 
Wednesday he announced a $1.5 million gift from the Peter Jay Sharp 
Foundation. Half the money will go to the new Brooklyn Academy of 
Music Rose Cinema. The rest will go to operating expenses. He also 
announced that Daniel Talbot, owner of the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas and 
New Yorker Films, would be the director of film programming at the 
academy. Melillo said he was particularly interested in more international 
and technological fare and in younger artists. But he said that he 
and Lichtenstein had worked together for so long that audiences accustomed 
to Lichtenstein's vision would not see major changes at the academy. 
``I think BAM has mushroomed to a level with the art community, that 
there's a BAM identity that goes beyond Harvey,'' he said. ``I don't 
think it's personality driven anymore.'' Lichtenstein agreed. ``We've 
built a strong group of people who've been together for a long period 
of time and are committed to what we do here,'' he said. ``We all 
share a vision for what BAM is and where it needs to go. They'll take 
their own risks and go where their instincts take them. I'll really 
love to see where they take it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>