<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It has been more than a decade since Dave Stewart, the bearded half 
of the 80s electro-pop duo the Eurythmics, made himself and Annie 
Lennox into international darlings of a fledging music video medium 
that gave birth to MTV. Now, Stewart, who at 46 appears no less the 
determined musician of his younger days, is once again teasing at 
the creative edges of yet another emerging mass medium: the Internet. 
Last month, Stewart helped to start an Internet site he calls the 
Sly-Fi Network. The site's logo is a pair of retro-techno-styled headphones 
that Stewart, who has a flare for the whimsical, sometimes wears. 
The wacky headphones also grace the cover of his new album, aptly 
named ``Sly-Fi,'' some of which can be heard on the network's Sly-Fi 
Hi-Fi section; the album is distributed and sold only on the Internet. 
Recently, Stewart, not wearing the headphones, did a cybercast on 
his site from an 18th-century church turned recording studio in London. 
He did appear with his British working-class brogue and swept-back 
blond hair, inventing a new song and, as always, reinventing himself. 
``I've always sort of like got my ear to the ground and listening 
for how things are progressing,'' Stewart said in a recent telephone 
interview from his studio in London. One of the things he has taken 
particular notice of has been the Internet, the ``first place,'' he 
says, ``that I've ever felt that I really belong.'' While some others 
fear that the Internet's vast computer network will ultimately isolate 
people at their keyboards, Stewart said he is convinced that quite 
the opposite is more likely. ``To me it's a brilliant opening up of 
the world,'' he said of cyberspace in general. As if to prove his 
point, Stewart, who long ago acquired a reputation as an artful tinkerer 
with new technologies, helped to create the Sly-Fi Network (www.slyfi.com 
or www.davestewart.com) to involve people in his music and art, he 
said. Far from being just another online rock star fan club, the site 
_ part of Stewart's deal with Digital Artists, a new label at N2K 
Encoded Music, which is part of a major online entertainment company, 
N2K Inc. _ is designed to be a gathering point for artistic adventure. 
Stewart says the site, or network as he calls it, is aiming at nothing 
less than establishing alternative means of artistic freedom, expression 
and collaboration. Increasingly, major recording artists, most notably 
David Bowie and the artist formerly known as Prince, have been expanding 
the boundaries of what musicians can do with the Internet. In that 
spirit, Stewart, a singer, song writer, producer, photographer, filmmaker, 
screenwriter and lecturer who has worked on projects with people as 
diverse as Bob Dylan and Kevin Spacey, said he wants to test those 
boundaries even further on his network. He calls it his ``multimedia 
playground.'' ``What gets him excited, and me too, with this medium 
is that it absolutely has no rules,'' said Nick Turner, vice president 
of N2K's Music Boulevard Network, West Coast. ``With this medium you 
make up the rules as you go along. It is so free to experiment and 
try things.'' In an instance several weeks ago, Stewart trained a 
video camera on his studio for 24 hours, giving anyone linked to his 
site a desktop view into his world. Pushing the technology much further, 
he recently invited people to help him write a song over the Internet. 
He posted only the name of the song-to-be, ``Get Over Yourself,'' 
and the date and time when he would begin the collaboration on line. 
What followed was a live cybercast from his London studio, which he 
has dubbed Sly-Fi Mission Control. Reminiscent of the packed BBC studio 
where the Beatles' ``All You Need Is Love'' was broadcast in the late 
1960s, Stewart's studio was similarly crammed with people joining 
in on the music making. And you didn't have to be there. He received 
e-mail from as far away as Japan as suggestions about lyrics and digital 
beats for the song-in-progress streamed into the studio. And as the 
cybercast went on for hours, Stewart dutifully read, edited and incorporated 
lyrics that spilled out of his computer's printer. ``I think it was 
a great, interesting experience in the world being connected,'' Stewart 
said. ``It is amazing to have people in the world joining in on something.'' 
After he finished the song, he made it freely available on his network. 
He said he decided to give the song away because so many people helped 
to write it that it would be impossible to credit everyone responsible 
for it. Stewart's site also offers two software programs, Res Rocket 
and Mixman Studio, that encourage online visitors to get yet more 
directly involved in his music. Res Rocket, designed more for professional 
musicians, permits people in different locations to plug in their 
MIDI-enabled instruments and play together on line and in real time 
_ a musical teleconference. ``Imagine,'' Stewart said, ``if you were 
a kid and you live in some town in Alaska and you want to be in a 
band, but none of your friends play the bass.'' With Res Rocket, which 
can be downloaded from his site, he said the same youngster could 
be ``jamming with somebody who lives in New Orleans.'' The other program, 
Mixman Studio, permits a more solitary interaction with Stewart's 
music. Mixman is a real-time sound mixer that can splice and blend 
up to 16 samples of music at a time, resulting in a piece of original 
recorded music. Stewart supplies 16 samples of some of the music on 
his new album, including bass lines, vocal tracks, keyboard cords 
and percussion. By using the program, a computer keyboard becomes 
a kind of mixing board, its makers say. But will such technological 
gadgetry destroy the soul of the music? Stewart, whose trademark production 
style often blended what he characterized as ``weird hybrids'' like 
a drum machine and a symphonic orchestra, says absolutely not. ``It's 
what you do with it,'' he said. ``I remember when synthesizers came 
out and people said, `Oh, it's the death of rock and roll.' And then 
when CDs came out, `Oh, that's the end.' Now the Internet and people 
say, `That's the end, nobody will be able to talk anymore.' '' Stewart 
said he is, through his music and Sly-Fi, proving wrong the skeptics 
of the marriage of music and the Internet. Next he plans to hold a 
kind of song-writing tutorial on line. ``I'll answer people's questions 
on line about songs that I have written,'' he explained. In the meantime, 
he is showing the music video for the album's first single, a dark 
but upbeat autobiographical song called ``Happy To Be Here.'' The 
video can also be found on a tour of Stewart's virtual apartment. 
That can be found on his music CD itself when the disk is placed in 
a computer's CD-ROM drive. (Hint: the music video is in his television 
set). Candy Dulfer, the Dutch-born fusion jazz saxophonist, said she 
was not surprised that Stewart invited the world into his creative 
processes. After years of collaborating with him the old-fashioned 
way, in brick-and-mortar studios, she said she discovered that he 
was ``just that kind of person,'' adding: ``Every time I'm there he 
seems to have new and exciting things happening and it's all about 
the music,'' said Ms. Dulfer, whose first big hit, ``Lilly Was Here'' 
in 1989 was a collaboration with Stewart on a movie soundtrack he 
had done for a European film with the same name. ``Sly-Fi to me is 
kind of a diary, an extract of things that I am doing in my life,'' 
Stewart explains in a video interview stored on his site. He added, 
``it's something that you would come across on the Net and say, `What 
the hell is that?' '' Already, Stewart has released a frenetic short 
film he made for the Sly-Fi TV section of the network. In quick-cut 
style, the film sweeps through original images that include an Eurythmics 
montage, scenes of Timothy Leary's house where he was a frequent guest, 
footage of Jon Bon Jovi in a London taxi, and pictures he took of 
Demi Moore on a beach in Goa for a fashion magazine. There is even 
a shot of Stewart in an Andy Warhol-like wig. ``A bit like Warhol, 
I've been obsessed with documenting things and filming stuff,'' said 
Stewart who edits his films in his London apartment, the same one 
featured in all its mod-sensibility on his CDs virtual tour. He said 
he plans to produce and post the new films to his site every couple 
of weeks or so and play host to a range of events. Right now Stewart 
is holding an online contest. The winner gets an all- expenses paid 
trip to London to be his guest presenter on Sly-Fi TV's Halloween 
special. Yet as he is the hub of a wildly spinning world of bits, 
bytes and beats, Stewart, says in the end that it is not as complicated 
as it might seem. ``I'm just a traditional singer-song writer,'' he 
said, ``using contemporary methods.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>