<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0271 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Historically, getting a musical composition published was more than 
a practical way of putting a new score into circulation. It was a 
tangible sign that a composer had arrived on the scene and was to 
be taken seriously. That situation has changed. The music publishing 
business was already in crisis some 15 years ago, when personal computer 
programs enabled composers to create manuscripts as attractive and 
legible as engraved published scores. Now that such programs have 
become less complicated and more flexible, the computer-generated 
score is the standard. Many composers still write music by hand. But 
most create scores through the musical equivalent of desktop publishing, 
and this practice has profoundly changed the way music is distributed 
and the very meaning of publishing. Copyright lawyers, royalty collection 
agencies and musicians everywhere are racing to keep pace with the 
technology. Naturally, the changes affect many other areas of art 
and commerce, including the cataloging of music, as a striking recent 
example makes clear. In May, Hinshaw, a music publishing house, released 
``The Literature of Chamber Music,'' by Arthur Cohn: a four-volume, 
3,075-page encyclopedia of chamber works, ranging from Baroque trio 
sonatas to contemporary compositions. Decades in preparation, it was 
the final work of Cohn, a tireless scholar and musician who died in 
February at 87, before this labor of love was published. If you are 
a musician looking for an unusual work to perform _ a string trio 
by the Mexican composer Manuel Ponce, perhaps _ or a program annotator 
wondering why a Haydn string quartet (Op. 50, No. 6) is nicknamed 
the ``Frog,'' this compilation will be invaluable. But ``The Literature 
of Chamber Music'' is less comprehensive when it comes to music by 
living or recently deceased composers, because Cohn focuses for the 
most part on published works. In the case of Mendelssohn, most of 
whose chamber works were published, that selection procedure is adequate. 
But it is less so with a turn-of-the-century composer like Milhaud, 
and quite inadequate with a living master like Donald Martino, whose 
works have mostly been self-published. Martino's catalog of chamber 
pieces is extensive, but Cohn lists only five. Just one work by John 
Harbison is included, even though this Pulitzer Prize-winning composer 
has written many chamber pieces that have been performed widely. Even 
the ``Kroslish'' Sonata, by the flinty genius Ralph Shapey, which 
was composed in 1985 for two high-profile musicians, the cellist Joel 
Krosnick and the pianist Gilbert Kalish, is not included, presumably 
because it has yet to be published by a major house. Cohn made a valiant 
effort to include published works no longer available, reasoning correctly 
that they were obtainable from libraries. Of course, even an encyclopedia 
has to stop somewhere, and if Cohn had tried to include every discoverable 
piece, ``The Literature of Chamber Music'' would probably have been 
24 volumes. Still, the sketchy listings of more recent works signal, 
however inadvertently, the tremendous change the personal computer 
has wrought on music publishing. Most composers started giving up 
on the major publishing houses long ago. The engraving of classical-music 
scores is an expensive process, and the market for them has never 
been large. To keep 1,000 copies of even so important a work as Elliott 
Carter's Cello Sonata in stock represents an enormous investment. 
And as in other fields, smaller, principled publishing houses have 
increasingly been sold to conglomerates. Even family-run companies 
with important catalogs, like Carl Fischer, enter publication limbo 
when ownership changes hands, as Cohn knew from his experience as 
director of ``serious music'' at Fischer. So it was natural for composers 
to step into the breech, as Gunther Schuller did in the late 1970s, 
founding two publishing companies, Margun and Gunmar, to disseminate 
a wide range of contemporary works. If the big firms were not going 
to take care of composers, he reasoned, composers had better take 
care of themselves. But most composers know little about the business 
side of music, says Fran Richards, the director of concert music for 
the American Association of Composers, Authors and Publishers. As 
the oldest and largest performing rights organization in the country, 
ASCAP licenses compositions and collects royalty fees for its members. 
``Composers think that if they put themselves in the hands of a big 
publishing house, then the gates of heaven will open,'' Ms. Richards 
said. ``They are getting wiser, but they must engage themselves in 
the business, and I work continually with composers to help.'' Ms. 
Richards offers a simple illustration of the complexity of the problem: 
a new piece is played before 5,000 listeners at a national flute convention, 
and many flutists want to order it. But from whom? There used to be 
two choices: if it is published, order it from the publisher; if not, 
get a copy directly from the composer. But computer technology has 
created new options, the most intriguing being the growth of small 
companies that work with scores prepared by composers on computers. 
One such company is Davidge Publishing, founded six years ago by Gail 
Davidge, a 46-year-old single mother with a background in marketing, 
who runs it part-time from her home near St. Paul. Ms. Davidge tends 
to a roster of 14 composers, but there are aspects of the publishing 
business, as it has been done by the major houses, that Ms. Davidge 
does not do. ``I don't do engraving of manuscripts but work from computer-prepared 
scores,'' she said. ``I don't proofread scores. I don't keep large 
quantities of music in stock.'' It is more cost-effective to keep 
a hard copy on file and photocopy quantities of scores as ordered. 
Most important, unlike major publishers, Ms. Davidge does not pick 
and choose among a composer's works. She accepts everything into her 
catalog. ``I take a holistic approach to the business,'' she said. 
``I work with composers closely and get to know them as people. I 
even help with grant proposals and contract writing. It's a very symbiotic 
relationship.'' Relieved of the cost of engraving scores and maintaining 
large stocks, Ms. Davidge can concentrate on proselytizing for her 
composers, marketing their works, mailing requested scores and seeing 
that royalty fees are collected. Significantly, she offers her clients 
a co-copyright arrangement, which is unusual. In book publishing, 
it has been traditional for the author to retain the copyright to 
a book. In music publishing, for reasons that have never been adequately 
explained, the composer has traditionally ceded the copyright to the 
publisher. So Ms. Davidge's policy is attractive and may be a model 
for the future. ``There is no mechanism within the big corporate structure 
of major publishing houses to devote time and energy to introducing 
a new work of music,'' she said. ``I don't get paid for my time. It 
can take 18 months for a publisher's royalty fee to be returned after 
a piece has been performed, a long lag time for a restless corporate 
entity. My share of a first year's royalty for a new work might be 
$12. But I believe in my people and believe that in time they will 
have works with a good return.'' Among the composers Ms. Davidge is 
literally banking on are up-and-coming names, including Scott Lindorth, 
Tina Davidson, Paul Schoenfield, Randall Woolf and Scott Wheeler. 
There is a downside to the new technology, says composer Charles Fussell, 
who is a holdout. Fussell still prepares his scores by hand, though 
when the Newton Symphony in Massachusetts commissioned a work from 
him, the orchestra paid for the preparation of a handsome engraved 
score. That work, ``Wilde: A Symphony in Three Movements for Baritone 
and Orchestra,'' was a finalist for the 1991 Pulitzer Prize in music. 
``I miss music stores,'' Fussell said recently, places where you can 
go and browse through scores. There are not many left, and it's a 
tremendous loss.'' The work of the American Music Center in New York, 
which serves as a clearing house for works by living American composers, 
is therefore critical, Fussell added. But here, too, the computer 
is coming to the rescue, in this case with the Web site. Increasingly, 
musicians browse through new compositions via Web sites. Of course, 
Cohn's survey of chamber music will also help spread the word. When 
Cohn started preparing this work decades ago, the personal computer 
did not exist, so it is understandable that his volumes take no account 
of the implications of the computer for publishing. ``Arthur was the 
kind of scholar who reverently pored over scores by great composers,'' 
Ms. Richards said. ``So everyone should remember how precious, how 
revitalizing it is to be involved with bringing a new work, a new 
score, to the public for the first time.'' Increasingly, those scores 
will be prepared on computers. Composers and publishers will communicate 
via e-mail. Musicians will browse through Web sites in search of new 
works. And if everyone involved adapts, the future could be bright 
indeed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>