<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0388 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Red banners flapping in the breeze, Communists and trade unionists 
led a nationwide strike Wednesday to protest President Boris Yeltsin's 
rule. In Moscow, thousands of protesters marched toward the Kremlin 
during a brilliantly sunny day to demand that Yeltsin resign. In Vladivostok, 
the impoverished port city on Russia's Pacific Coast, strikers briefly 
blocked a road. But the marches drew only a small fraction of the 
10 million demonstrators the Communists had expected. And while thousands 
of factories and companies conducted short, symbolic work stoppages, 
life basically went on as usual. The Moscow subway operated normally 
and stores were open for business. Traffic was light, as many Moscovites 
took advantage of the demonstrations to turn the day of national protest 
into a holiday. Wednesday's tepid protests were in stark contrast 
to the anxiety early this week. Overheated rhetoric by Communist Party 
leaders about ``civil war'' and the economic shocks of past weeks 
prompted fears that this could be a difficult, even dangerous, week 
for the Kremlin. Braced for trouble, Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov 
promised earlier in the week to pay back wages. Moscow schools were 
closed Wednesday as a security precaution. The American Chamber of 
Commerce went so far as to warn foreigners to avoid the city center 
and to disguise their nationality. The Kremlin also arranged for the 
marches to take place far from the White House, the spot where tanks 
loyal to Yeltsin fired on the rebellious Parliament in 1993, and an 
emotionally charged symbol for the left. In fact, Wednesday's protest 
march seemed more like a casual city stroll than a parade of revolutionaries. 
The crowd, whose members tended to be elderly, was made up of trade 
unionists, workers and pensioners. The protesters gathered across 
the river from the Kremlin and trudged peacefully toward St. Basil's 
Cathedral, while a loudspeaker played revolutionary songs from the 
Russian Civil War, like the ballad of Commander Shchors, a legendary 
Red Army Commander. Holding a banner that read, ``No to Private Property,'' 
the vanguard marched by billboards for Nescafe coffee, Renault cars, 
Casio watches and Samsung televisions. At a rally near St. Basil's, 
there were fiery calls for Yeltsin to quit, but no real expectation 
that he would actually do so. Some of the labor officials tried to 
turn the protest into a campaign for Moscow's mayor, Yuri Luzhkov, 
who has sought to position himself as the leader of a new center-left 
coalition in the next presidential election. But they drew catcalls 
and boos from the hard-core Communists. And after an hour or so of 
speech-making, most of the crowd drifted away. Yeltsin, for his part, 
came to the Kremlin early Wednesday and monitored the situation, telephoning 
security officials and militia across the country. Yeltsin's spokesman 
said the president had received ``absolutely complete information, 
both pleasant and unpleasant.'' Wednesday's strikes, in fact, were 
as much a referendum on the Communists' ability to tap the vein of 
national discontent as a test of Yeltsin's dwindling popularity. The 
Communists had planned to mobilize some 200,000 demonstrators in Moscow, 
but the Kremlin insisted that no more than 50,000 turned out. The 
actual number seemed to be closer to the lower end of the spectrum. 
Relatively low turnouts were also reported in other parts of the nation. 
Police estimated that 70,000 had protested in the Vladivostok region, 
not the 300,000 the Communists claimed. The Kremlin insisted that 
no more than 1 million participated in the marches or strikes, one-tenth 
the number projected by the Communists. In the Siberian region of 
Krasnoyarsk, Alexander Lebed, the governor and presidential hopeful, 
egged on the protesters, telling them that Yeltsin was alone and isolated. 
There are several reasons why Wednesday's protests were only a pale 
reflection of what had been advertised. Primakov was able to partially 
defuse the protest by promising to pay back wages and by naming Communists 
to top positions in his Cabinet. Many Russians have also become deeply 
cynical about politics and no longer have any expectation that the 
government will help them. When Russians were asked in a recent poll 
who they relied on in a crisis, only 12 percent said they counted 
on the state. In contrast, 61 percent said they rely ``only on myself,'' 
according to the survey, which was conducted by the Center for International 
Sociological Studies. Further, many Russians who are unhappy with 
Russia's version of capitalism do not think that the Communist Party, 
which is led by the uncharismatic Gennady Zuganov, is capable of leading 
the nation out of its economic crisis. The national mood seemed to 
be captured during the recent mayoral election in Vladivostok, where 
a majority voted against all the candidates. ``It's absurd to demonstrate 
now,'' said Vladimir Speransky, a sociologist who said he came to 
watch the demonstration. ``It's not clear whom to protest against.'' 
Some of the fringe groups had even less success than the mainstream 
Communists in mobilizing their supporters. Viktor Anpilov, the vituperative 
leader of the far-left faction Working Russia, had expected to mobilize 
thousands of his supporters. But no more than 300 showed up. The event 
also attracted the usual complement of Cossacks, Monarchists and fascist 
extremists, who, by and large, mingled peacefully with the crowd. 
Still, dedicated Communists insisted the demonstrations were an important 
way for Russians to show that they want Yeltsin to resign and make 
way for a new president. Vasily Shishkaryov, a 48-year-old worker 
at the Zil truck factory, said he joined the Moscow protest but many 
of his coworkers stayed away.He said he only received 2,500 rubles 
a month, about $156. Because prices have soared and imports have dried 
up with the collapse of the ruble, he spends almost all of it on food. 
Most of his fellow workers, he said, gathered potatoes and vegetables 
in the countryside to scrape by. Some have virtually given up eating 
meat since the factory's subsidized sausage store shut down. Most 
of his fellow workers were more resigned than angry, and he said that 
they would not be ready to take to the streets until things got much 
worse. ``We got paid in August,'' he said. ``I don't think people 
will take any real action until they have gone eight months without 
wages.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>