<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0485 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton on Wednesday gave House members public leeway to 
``cast a vote of principle and conscience'' on a Republican-drafted 
impeachment inquiry on Thursday. But White House advisers and Democratic 
House leaders worked hard to draw as many party members as possible 
to vote instead for a more limited investigation. Clinton's remarks 
allowed House Democrats facing tough re-election fights to set their 
own course as the House votes to begin only the third impeachment 
inquiry into a president's actions. He spoke as some Democrats openly 
complained that they were tired of White House pressure to short-circuit 
an inquiry. Stopping short of some Democrats' hopes that he would 
tell them to vote alongside Republicans and put the burden on them 
to be fair, Clinton told reporters, ``It's up to others to decide 
what happens to me and ultimately it's going to be up to the American 
people to make a clear statement there.'' First Lady Hillary Rodham 
Clinton and other aides, however, did keep up an effort to convince 
the undecided to vote for their party's proposal. With the House under 
the control of a Republican majority, it is certain to vote against 
the Democrats' call for a limited inquiry into Clinton's deceptions 
of his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. It will then move to pass 
the Republicans' broader impeachment resolution, modeled on the one 
used to begin the Watergate inquiry a quarter of a century ago, calling 
for Clinton to be investigated ``fully and completely.'' On the eve 
of the vote, a letter sent to the Judiciary Committee by Kenneth Starr, 
the independent counsel, only bolstered the Republicans' drive for 
an open-ended inquiry. Responding to a query last week from the committee, 
Starr said that he ``cannot foreclose the possibility of providing 
the House of Representatives'' with additional findings of possible 
impeachable offenses. Starr would only say that some matters remained 
under active investigation, although he made clear in his referral 
to Congress that a sexual harassment accusation by Kathleen Willey, 
a former White House volunteer, remained unresolved. Clinton has denied 
under oath any misconduct with Ms. Willey. The phrasing of the Republicans' 
resolution leaves open the door for the inquiry to move in any direction. 
With several dozen agonized Democrats still uncertain how they will 
vote, Democratic House leaders went from meeting to meeting on Wednesday 
looking for a way to preserve a semblance of party unity and to prevent 
many of their members from joining the Republicans on the crucial 
vote. After an impassioned and divided two-hour closed Democratic 
caucus, House Democratic leaders revised their own inquiry proposal, 
bringing it ever closer to the Republican version. The new Democratic 
plan calls for an investigation to end on Dec. 31. It also leaves 
open the possibility that any inquiry could move beyond Clinton's 
relationship with Ms. Lewinsky should Starr present more evidence 
of impeachable offenses on other issues. ``You've got a Republican 
proposal,'' said Rep. Dick Gephardt, the House minority leader. ``You've 
got a Democratic proposal. Both of them launch an inquiry. The question 
is how we're going to do this. And a lot of our members feel very 
strongly that this should be done right. This is a high moment for 
the House of Representatives.'' Democratic leaders seemed resigned 
that they would lose anywhere from two dozen to 60 party members on 
Thursday's vote. These Democrats are expected to first vote for the 
Democratic plan, and when that fails vote for the Republican plan. 
But beyond counting votes and reshaping their alternative, the leadership 
was not pressuring House Democrats on how to vote. Rep. Gary Ackerman, 
D-N.Y., said his party's leaders were most concerned about minimizing 
losses in the looming mid-term election and ``don't want to drown 
anyone'' by trying to force party unity. As the House vote neared, 
a prominent Senate Democrat took to the floor of his chamber to warn 
the White House against meddling on Capitol Hill. ``I would suggest 
by way of friendly advice to the White House: Don't tamper with this 
jury,'' said Sen. Robert Byrd of West Virginia, expressing his displeasure 
with White House efforts over the weekend to convince 34 Democratic 
senators to sign a letter saying they would not vote to convict the 
president, should he be impeached. To his own colleagues, Byrd said: 
``We may have to sit as jurors. Don't let it be said that we allowed 
ourselves to be tampered with.'' Clinton himself downplayed the idea 
that he was lobbying for his survival. He said that while he was talking 
to House Democrats, ``a large number called me. I'm attempting to 
call them all back and I will try to do that.'' He said, ``More important 
than anything else to me is that they do the people's work.'' Democrats, 
demonstrating the turmoil in their ranks, had sharply different views 
of what strategy was best for their party. While the leadership worked 
on the Democratic plan, Rep. James Moran of Virginia, a moderate Democrat 
who has been in touch with the White House, argued that it was better 
politically and tactically for Democrats to vote with the Republicans. 
Such a stand, he argued, would give Democrats more credibility eventually 
to vote against Clinton's impeachment. And he argued that a partisan 
vote on Thursday would turn the November election into a referendum 
on Clinton. ``If November 3 is a referendum on the president's conduct, 
we lose,'' he said. ``The endgame for Democrats is gaining control 
of the Congress and I don't think we do that by playing on this field.'' 
Other Democrats facing tough re-election bids worried that they were 
facing what Rep. Calvin Dooley of California described as ``a lose-lose 
vote here.'' He said he and colleagues feared that siding with the 
Republicans would alienate base Democratic voters while siding with 
the Republicans would drive away independent voters. Dooley said that 
Clinton's advice to Democrats to vote their conscience had done nothing 
to help with this dilemma. Rep. Carolyn McCarthy, from a swing New 
York distirct on Long Island said she would reluctantly vote for the 
Republican plan to launch formal impeachment proceedings. ``To be 
honest, this is probably going to be a no-win situation for me back 
home, but the process has to go forward,'' Mrs. McCarthy said. ``I'm 
not thrilled about how the Republicans have made this open-ended, 
but I believe the process has to be moved forward.'' But Rep. Eliot 
Engel, a New York City Democrat, said he strongly opposed the Republicans' 
proposal. ``When I go back to my district,'' he said, ``People are 
fed up with this. They say, `Leave the president alone.' '' As the 
Democrats agonized, Republicans sat back and waited for Thursday's 
vote. House Speaker Newt Gingrich said that Republican leaders were 
not counting votes. ``There will be no arm-twisting,' he said. ``Members 
need to take this vote as a matter of conscience and we'll let the 
chips fall where they may tomorrow.'' On Wednesday night, the two 
parties were still negotiating over how much time would be alloted 
for the debate on opening an impeachment inquiry. As a bargaining 
ploy, Democrats asked for eight hours, while Republicans said they 
were hoping to hold the debate to two or three hours. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>