<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0292 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No one seems to be in the business of subsidizing creative genius 
anymore, a situation brought home by the demise last week of Isaac 
Mizrahi's business, a tale that is being mourned and dissected here 
by designers, editors and retailers alike. What is evident in the 
wake of Mizrahi's closing of his business is that designers in their 
own houses are ships at sea, unable to surf the choppy fashion waters 
unless tethered to a bigger boat _ like Tom Ford at Gucci, Narciso 
Rodriguez at LVMH, John Bartlett at Byblos and the newcomers Veronique 
Branquinho and Raf Simons, who showed their first collection here 
for Ruffo, a large Italian leather company. It is these designers 
who seem the strongest and are wielding the greatest influence in 
fashion, as a group outweighing designers whose sole profile is as 
the head of their own house. In the long run, the chill that was cast 
by the Mizrahi episode may well translate into future collections 
that are sober and safely wearable, which would be unfortunate. But 
this season's collections, created weeks and months ago, slide from 
galloping optimism to tortured soulfulness and are an interesting 
contrast to the unsettled undercurrents swirling about. Back when 
those lines were conceived, Mizrahi was not out of business, the stock 
market had not taken a dive, the Asian crisis had not become a global 
contagion, the Italian government was not in danger of collapse and 
Cher's daughter had not published a book saying that her mother had 
at first disapproved of her lesbianism. Cher is probably the last 
mother one would expect to disapprove of Chastity's unconventional 
behavior. And Cher is the last icon one would expect Ford to evoke 
for Gucci, though that is just what he did. Ford has brilliantly made 
over the image of Cher into a sleek, ersatz hippie _ the message being 
that there is no need to abandon materialism to join his hippie club. 
In fact, a strong regard for capitalism is virtually a requirement. 
(By the time we really got to know her, Cher was too rich to qualify 
as a hippie, anyway.) With this collection, for spring 1999, and his 
spring men's wear shown earlier this year, Ford has made a sharp turn 
in the road he started down when he began reinventing Gucci in 1994. 
The women's show broached many of the same themes as his men's wear. 
A Gucci woman with cool to spare revels in a man-style gray locker-room 
T-shirt, paired with charcoal wool trousers with rhinestones and sequins. 
Ford made tongue-in-chic use of hibiscus prints in loose, hipster 
trousers and flirty, ruffled dresses. It is not by accident that they 
appear to have been washed on the river rocks of a Hawaiian spring. 
If the influence is Cher _ the models wore bone-straight, center-part 
hair _ then one need not be a member of Mensa to figure out the show's 
finale. That's right, along came rows of dangling and draped beaded 
fringe dresses a la Bob Mackie. Ford produced an authoritative rendering 
of the cultural mix pervading fashion right now. He presented what 
might be called multicultural jeans _ pants that combine the Yankee 
Americana of faded blue denim, Native American-style brown feathers, 
South African Ndebele beading and Indian decorative mirrors. Although 
Ford's collection is superbly exuberant, it is too quirky to offer 
direction for an entire industry, as he has done with Gucci in the 
past. It is hard to imagine pink hibiscus prints sweeping the nation. 
But this is not a moment to find heroes in fashion. Designers are 
still grappling with what comes next after minimalism. Backward-looking 
references, like some on Ford's runway, may not be the answer. Rodriguez, 
in his own signature collection (he also designs LVMH's Loewe line), 
approaches the problem by wrestling with the here and now. Melding 
ideas from his two previous collections, he played with the proportions 
of the waistline, elongating the torso with tube tops and cummerbunds 
slipped over dresses and jackets. Here a woman's waist defines her 
femininity. He showed tube tops of soft knits, slipping them over 
form-hugging dresses that brushed the knee. Structured versions of 
the tube tops, extending to the hips, elongated the torso and added 
interest. Rodriguez's collars are hardly collars at all, more like 
soft wings of fabric, which frame the deep decolletages on simple 
tunic tops and effortless dresses. The designer has a pleasingly light 
hand, applying just a whisper of the rustic in textured linens and 
colorless nubby knit tops and dresses. He cares not one whit about 
separating clothes into night and day attire, offering in the same 
outfit ideas that apply to both _ dresses with gold metallic textures 
and white knits, or white sheer knit tanks and glistening, oil-black 
cigarette trousers. At Byblos, Bartlett has yet to hit the stride 
he's attained in his own signature collections, but that has not prevented 
him from making a good impression with loose, nubile shapes that free 
the body for movement and relaxation. Skimming tunics patterned after 
djellabas were paired with loose, cropped pajama pants. He added the 
crispness of a suit to khaki shirts by imbuing the shirts with the 
military air of epaulettes backed with a flash of orange. Bandeaux, 
in tie-dyed knits or in leather, reflected desert vegetation in brown 
and mossy green. There is an approachability that Bartlett is mastering 
for Byblos, in contrast to his own collection, which has more in common 
with the menace of the work of Ms. Branquinho and Simons, two of the 
more celebrated young talents in fashion. Ms. Branquinho designed 
the women's wear and Simons the men's collection for Ruffo Research. 
Invoking their Goth oeuvre, which has drawn attention to their own 
individual collections, these designers, who are also a couple, showed 
a concise and masterful collection of leather bomber jackets, with 
exquisite plisse detail at the waist and cuffs. There were also luxurious 
full black leather skirts that swept the floor and were decorated 
with panels of latticework. In contrast to Ms. Branquinho's and Simon's 
individualist work is the industrialism of Max Mara. One nice idea 
here was the underslip of brilliantly colored jersey that winked through 
side slits on khaki skirts and dresses. But longtime fashion editors 
and retailers have a saying: there's something good to be found in 
every collection, no matter how disappointing. Far too many shows, 
including those of Alessandro Dell'Acqua, Ferragamo, Anna Molinari, 
Moschino, Bottega Veneta and Jan &AMP; Carlos, earned this faint praise. 
From the parade of Mao worker jackets with frog closures and cheongsam 
dresses at Ferragamo to the indiscriminate layering of tulle and other 
sheer fabrics over trousers and skirts at Anna Molinari, many designers 
in Milan had a story's worth of ideas, but they had lost the plot. 
When Laura Moltedo, Manuela Morin and Edward Buchanan, an American, 
came out to take their bow at the end of the Bottega Veneta show, 
it was perplexing to imagine that it took three designers to come 
up with this banal mix of cotton skirts and dresses tied at the bosom 
like bath towels. It was disappointing because the house has recently 
made great leaps in updating its accessories and developing its ready-to-wear. 
Dell'Acqua, invoking the theme of a ``white widow,'' the colloquial 
Italian term for a woman left behind when her husband goes to war, 
tried hard and succeeded with beautiful full skirts decorated with 
flat seams, and a sheer black skirt with ruffles that formed chevrons 
down the front and back. He suggested the doleful sexiness of a young 
bride torn between a husband who may never return and her all-too-human 
needs. But however appealing this idea, it often dissolved into design 
melodrama, like drapes of pleated chiffon that hung from the backs 
of blouses, and a short ecru pleated tabard over a black chiffon shirt. 
The earnestness of designers in Milan is palpable. Everyone seems 
to be looking around, trying to figure out what's next as the millennium 
approaches and economic uncertainty looms. The easiest path would 
be to shackle every collection to a tried-and-true blazer. Would that 
have saved Mizrahi? Several designers are at least taking the higher 
road into the next century, trying inventive cuts, abstraction in 
color and shape, a melding of the artisinal and the industrial, the 
modern and the folkway. It makes for a fluid moment in fashion with 
a surfeit of collections that few women would die for, but in each 
one is some point of interest to commend it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>