<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0267 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Choreography, genuine and unusual, is on view this week at City Center, 
where the National Ballet of Canada opened on Tuesday night for its 
first visit to New York in a decade. The company, now directed by 
the the choreographer James Kudelka, looks totally transformed. With 
this splendid program (there are two other bills), the troupe from 
Toronto comes to the fore on the international dance scene as a first-class 
creative organization. It may not have rejected the standard repertory 
of its past, but that repertory is apparently no longer its focus. 
The four works on view, two by Kudelka, one by John Alleyne and one 
by Dominique Dumais, who is both a female soloist in the company and 
its rising choreographic talent, were all New York premieres. All 
are plotless but not devoid of emotion, and in one the dancers jump 
around in overcoats. All gave the dancers a high-octane technical 
workout and provided the audience with some surprises. There is a 
new look. If there was any hallmark of the National Ballet style, 
it was the academic correctness of its training. But Kudelka has loosened 
the company up: the dancers, both old and new, are more daring, fluent 
and energetic and articulate. The high leg extensions and arrow-sharp 
leaps are exhilarating to watch, and yet the attention to classical 
ballet's body placement and line is still present. And since much 
of Kudelka's own concerns as a choreographer have to do with new ways 
of partnering, his two ballets, ``Musings'' and ``The Four Seasons,'' 
are largely explorations of the ways two or even three and four dancers 
remain connected as they perform. Kudelka is no stranger to New York, 
where his works have also been seen with the Joffrey Ballet, the San 
Francisco Ballet, Margie Gillis' dance troupe and American Ballet 
Theater. At his best, as with Ballet Theater's ``Cruel World,'' he 
can tantalize with the mysteries of his images and also excite an 
audience with the passionate outpouring of his choreography. Part 
of ``Musings,'' created in 1991 for the former National Ballet star 
Karen Kain, is one of Kudelka's quieter (and longer) works and is 
set to Mozart's Quintet for Clarinet and Strings, which was played 
onstage by Max Christie, clarinet, and, on strings, by Fujiko Imajishi, 
Dominique Laplante, Angela Ruddetn and Maurizio Baccante. Like the 
music, the choreography has its intricacies beneath its lyrical surface. 
The piece starts well. Three men in 18th-century dress (Aleksandar 
Antonijevic, Johan Persson and Jeremy Ransom) enter consecutively 
and move in swift airborne turns around Jaimie Tapper, who is wearing 
a blue velvet bodice and a long skirt. The other women in the cast 
wear the same costume by Astrid Janson but in different hues, and 
the men look gallant and gentlemanly. When Jennifer Fournier, in red, 
appears as the pensive figure of the piece, she is followed by the 
three men, who mysteriously bend an arm to shield their faces. She 
is their guide and weeps. Ms. Tapper, Rebekah Rimsay and Stacey Shiori 
Minagawa gambol through the lively minuet section before a series 
of solos (Ms. Rimsay has some startling and violent torso rotations) 
and duets give the spectacular dancing the showcase it deserves. In 
Vivaldi's ``Four Seasons,'' conducted by Ormsby Wilkins, Kudelka turns 
the usual allegory about the seasons into an everyman's self-analysis. 
Rex Harrington, as strongly concentrated a performer as ever, is his 
moody self looking past the long-legged leaping brides, led by Chan 
Hon Goh, in the spring section. Carmen Alie and Denis Lavoie have 
designed nicely fantastical costumes. Greta Hodgkinson and Martine 
Lamy lead, respectively, the summer and autumn sections. Each segment 
experiments with Kudelka's interest in loose torsos and quick footwork. 
The punch line is the appearance of older character dancers in the 
winter section after Harrington is importuned by a jumping pest, Ransom. 
There is a Shakespearean tinge to this modern-dress older group, led 
by Victoria Bertram, the mother who cradles Harrington at the end. 
Alleyne, whose ballets have also been seen here at the New York City 
Ballet and in his company, Ballet British Columbia, has perfected 
his view of neo-classicism in ``Split House Geometric.'' Aggressive 
attack and wiry entanglements defined a duet for Stephanie Hutchison 
and Christopher Body, and was contrasted with a longer, yanking duet 
for the riveting Ms. Tapper and Anthony Randazzo. The music, on tape, 
was by Arvo Part. In ``Tides of Mind,'' Ms. Dumais used a tape of 
Dawn Upshaw, who sang the second movement of Gorecki's Third Symphony. 
The choreography for Ms. Lamy and Persson, looking back perhaps to 
a paradise lost, was impressive in its intensity and clarity. One 
looks forward to her next premiere on the second program. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>