<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last Friday, after Darryl Strawberry's doctors confirmed that the 
pains in his stomach were a result of a cancerous tumor in his colon, 
the phones starting ringing at Dr. Alice Furman's office. People with 
stomachaches, people who saw little spots of blood when they went 
to the bathroom, people in their 30s who were at almost no risk for 
colon cancer _ all wanted referrals for colon exams, immediately. 
``There was a rash of calls,'' said Dr. Furman, an internist in Manhattan. 
At the office of Dr. William Perlow, a gastroenterologist, the story 
was much the same. ``Just today before I sat down in my chair, my 
secretary told me 10 patients have booked for colonoscopy,'' Perlow 
said, referring to the test used to determine cancer in the colon. 
``That is much larger than usual.'' Although colon cancer is the second-biggest 
killer among cancers in America, it is hardly the most talked about. 
The disease lacks breast cancer's pink ribbon pins and ovarian cancer's 
glitzy benefits, like the one recently held by Saks Fifth Avenue with 
Elizabeth Tilberis, the editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar, who has 
suffered from that disease. And the area of the body colon cancer 
affects does not help its profile. Although it can be successfully 
treated if detected early, many people will not submit to the uncomfortable 
_ and what many see as embarrassing _ screening tests. Strawberry, 
an outfielder for the New York Yankees, is hardly the classic colon 
cancer patient. At age 36 and with no family history of the illness, 
he is in a small group. Most of those afflicted are over 50. But the 
rush to the phones after his cancer was diagnosed underscores the 
pivotal role a celebrity name can play in the public awareness and 
even early detection of potentially terminal diseases. ``When a celebrity 
gets a cancer that is generally not talked about that much,'' said 
Joann Schellenbach, a spokeswoman for the American Cancer Society, 
``people do get motivated to do something about it. So you try to 
use these situations as best you can.'' Ms. Schellenbach traced the 
role of famous people to Betty Ford, whose 1974 announcement about 
her breast cancer _ and candid talk about a subject previously seen 
as taboo _ sent women racing for mammograms, and sent the rate of 
breast cancer detection up that year. ``She was one of the first celebrities 
to talk about her situation,'' Ms. Schellenbach said. ``She set the 
stage for a whole different public awareness about cancer.'' Since 
then, many famous people have by proxy raised awareness of serious 
illnesses: some simply because they were so high-profile, like President 
Ronald Reagan, who was found to have colon cancer and who underwent 
successful surgery in 1985; others, like Ms. Tilberis, because of 
concerted efforts to raise awareness of a disease. But Reagan demonstrates 
how much public discourse on illness has changed in just a decade. 
When his colon cancer was diagnosed, he tried to maintain his privacy. 
But when his Alzheimer's disease was diagnosed in 1994, he released 
an open letter to the American public, and his wife, Nancy, has been 
an active and prolific voice on the issue with her own foundation. 
Other celebrities who have lent their names and faces to illnesses 
in recent years include Peggy Fleming, the skater, who survived breast 
cancer; Magic Johnson, the basketball player, who has been open about 
having HIV, and Michael Landon, the actor, who appeared on the ``Tonight'' 
show in 1991 to talk about his battle with liver and pancreatic cancer. 
Landon died later that year at age 54. Strawberry's case has also 
been somewhat extraordinary. While many athletes who are told they 
have a serious illness would most likely let a team's press release 
tell their story, Strawberry held a news conference on his front lawn, 
and broke down in tears on national television. His plight was intensified 
both by his long and public battle with drugs and alcohol, and by 
the fact that his friend and fellow baseball player, Eric Davis of 
the Baltimore Orioles, suffered colon cancer just a year ago at age 
35. While colon cancer is rare among men and women their age, it is 
second only to lung cancer among those cancers that kill Americans. 
About 131,600 cases of colon cancer will be diagnosed this year, according 
to American Cancer Society figures. What has frustrated doctors about 
the illness is that unlike many other forms of cancer, it is easily 
detected with early screening and therefore more treatable. But screening 
for colon cancer happens far less often than it should, medical experts 
say. The reasons are many, said Dr. Michael Choti, director of the 
Johns Hopkins colon cancer center in Baltimore. ``There is a fear 
factor,'' he said, referring to the instrument doctors use in peering 
into the colon, ``because it is one thing to get a mammogram or blood 
test, but the public fears that a sigmoidoscopy is uncomfortable. 
``The other factor is that the public is not aware. If I were to ask 
you what the American Cancer Society recommends for breast cancer, 
you would probably know, but you wouldn't for colon cancer.'' Recommendations 
by the American Cancer Society for colon cancer screening vary. If 
there is a family history of the disease, the recommendation is for 
relatives to have a colonoscopy 10 years before the stricken family 
member's age at diagnosis, or by age 40. Those with no family history 
and no previous cancers _ roughly 75 percent of the population _ are 
advised to have a colonoscopy at age 50 and every 10 years after. 
Precancerous polyps are easily detected though this method and can 
be removed in a doctor's office. If colon cancer is caught at a relatively 
early stage, the five-year survival rate is 92 percent, according 
to American Cancer Society statistics. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>