<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0469 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House and Senate Republicans agreed Wednesday on a vast overhaul of 
the bankruptcy system, making it more difficult for consumers to walk 
away from their debts and handing the banking and credit-card industries 
a major victory. The agreement was reached without the consent of 
congressional Democrats or the White House, and administration officials 
said they would recommend that President Clinton veto the bill because 
of its treatment of low-income consumers. Under the Republican agreement, 
only consumers with relatively low incomes could declare bankruptcy 
under the rules that wipe out many debts. But the agreement would 
give bankruptcy judges some discretion in determining whether debtors 
could file under Chapter 7, which wipes out many debts, or under Chapter 
13, which requires the repayment of most debts. Debtors who earn more 
than the median income _ $17,900 for single people and $51,000 for 
a family of four _ would be moved into Chapter 13. Also sent into 
Chapter 13 would be debtors who could repay 25 percent of their unsecured 
debts, like credit cards, or $5,000 over five years. The negotiated 
bill weakens a Senate-passed requirement that credit card companies 
disclose on each monthly bill how much consumers will owe and for 
how long if they make only the minimum payment. It also drops a Senate 
provision that sets a $100,000 limit on the value of homes that could 
be kept by those declaring bankruptcy. This means that people could 
still move to certain states, like Florida and Texas, buy expensive 
homes, declare bankruptcy and keep the entire worth of their homes. 
However, the compromise bill requires these people to live in the 
adopted state for at least two years before they can claim the homestead 
exemption. With the perception that low-income Americans _ primarily 
women and minorities, who are among Clinton's most reliable political 
allies _ would be hurt most by the bill, Hillary Rodham Clinton has 
argued against the House version, toward which the compromise tilts. 
The industry supported the House-passed bill, which was guided by 
a concern that filing for bankruptcy had become too easy and that 
thousands of Americans were abusing the system. The Senate bill started 
from the premise that easily available credit is also responsible 
for the increase in bankruptcies and that the credit-card industry 
needed to be held accountable along with consumers. Both the House 
and Senate had earlier approved vastly different bills, and negotiators 
have been scrambling to iron out the differences before Congress recesses 
this weekend. The Republican agreement was sent to the House floor 
for a vote, which could come as early as Thursday Republicans said 
Wednesday that they were happy with the compromise and that it was 
fair, but Democrats were furious, none more so than Sen. Richard Durbin 
of Illinois. He had joined Republicans in seeking an overhaul of the 
bankruptcy system, and his name gave the process bipartisan credibility. 
But he said he was shut out of the final negotiations. The Senate 
bill, which had passed by a vote of 97-1, ``has been devastated in 
a closed-door Republican conference,'' Durbin said. ``Republican conferees 
stripped out every significant consumer protection in the Senate bill,'' 
he added. ``The president will not sign this bill in its present form.'' 
Wednesday's agreement represents a huge success for banks, credit-card 
companies and retailers. The lending industry spent more than $40 
million to lobby for the changes, which could help it recoup an estimated 
$4 billion a year. Bankruptcy filings reached a record 1.42 million 
over the 12 months ending on June 30, continuing a troubling three-year 
trend that has persisted despite the robust economy. More than 1 million 
of these bankruptcies were filed under Chapter 7, which erases all 
debt except taxes, mortgages, student loans, child support, alimony 
and, in some cases, loans on a car needed to get to work. The industry 
supported the House-passed bill, which was guided by a concern that 
filing for bankruptcy had become too easy and that thousands of Americans 
were abusing the system. The Senate bill started from the premise 
that easily available credit is also responsible for the increase 
in bankruptcies and that the credit-card industry needed to be held 
accountable along with consumers. Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, who 
led the negotiations for the Senate, said that the compromise protected 
honest consumers from those who abused the bankruptcy rules. ``Consumers 
across the country who work hard and pay their own way should not 
be forced to subsidize the abusive spending practices of those who 
exploit the federal bankruptcy code for personal gain or convenience,'' 
he said. William Binzel, a lobbyist for MasterCard International, 
said that complaints of a bill that let the industry off the hook 
were unfounded. ``If a lender makes credit available to someone who 
can't afford to repay it, the lender loses the principle and interest,'' 
he said. ``The bill addresses the fundamental flaw in the law that 
allows a debtor who can repay a portion of his debts to use the system 
to walk away from those debts.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>