<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0444 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Aga Khan: the name shimmers with glamour. Fabulous wealth. Palatial 
houses. Racehorses. Yachts. Jewels. Royal prerogative. As if that 
weren't enough, the Aga Khan is also the most important figure in 
the world of architecture today. In a ceremony at the Alhambra in 
Spain last Friday, Prince Karim Aga Khan honored seven buildings and 
urban plans, winners of the 1998 Aga Khan Awards for Architecture. 
Founded in 1977 with the relatively modest aim of raising the standards 
of modern building in the Islamic world, the awards program has since 
become far more significant. By focusing the attention of Western 
architects, planners, historians, critics and the public on new building 
in the developing Islamic world, he has created a dynamic forum for 
defining architecture's place in the global culture emerging in the 
wake of the cold war. Though less well known than the Pritzker Architecture 
Prize _ often described as architecture's Nobel _ the Aga Khan's awards 
program has embraced a far broader cultural mission. Unlike the Pritzker 
Prize, the Aga Khan awards go to projects, not architects. In addition 
to appraising esthetic merit, jurors assess social needs, economic 
growth, environmental impact and the relationship between local traditions 
and innovations in contemporary architecture worldwide. This year, 
for example, the winners include the restoration of Hebron Old Town 
on the West Bank, the design of a leper hospital in Chopda Taluka, 
India, a new arts center in Lahore, Pakistan, and Tuwaiq Palace, a 
recreation center for the diplomatic quarter in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 
The range of projects is typical of those awarded in previous years. 
They adhere to no esthetic school, historical style or theoretical 
doctrine. But they do expand ideas on architecture beyond Western 
frames of reference. And they alter the context in which even Western 
buildings should be appraised. Above all, the awards program has created 
an opportunity for Westerners to reckon with the withdrawal of architecture's 
spiritural dimension from the public realm. In his commencement address 
at Brown University in 1996, the Aga Khan observed, ``For all Muslims, 
the concepts of Din and Dunya, Faith and World, are inextricably linked.'' 
At 61, the Aga Kahn is imam, or leader, of the Ismaili sect of Shia 
Muslims, an affluent group of about 13 million members who reside 
mainly in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Kenya, Egypt, the former Soviet 
Republics and other communities worldwide. He traces his descent from 
Mohammed through Fatima, the Prophet's daughter. A man of independent 
wealth, he also receives tithes from his followers and uses the money 
to support public works in Ismaili communities. As imam, the Aga Khan 
is responsible for the material as well as the spiritual well-being 
of his followers. Based at his Secretariat in Chantilly, less than 
an hour from Paris, the prince exercises his authority through the 
Aga Khan Development Network, a group of organizations that relies 
extensively on volunteers in Ismaili communities. The prince's interest 
in architecture began with his experience as a dissatisfied client, 
frustrated with the poor quality of the schools, hospitals, housing 
and other projects he had commissioned to serve Ismaili communities. 
Since then, he has also established a program to restore historic 
cities, including buildings in Cairo, Zanzibar and Samarkand, and 
funded the study of Islamic architecture at Harvard and the University 
of Pennsylvania. I first learned of the awards in the late 1980s in 
Mimar, the prince's sumptuously produced magazine dedicated to new 
buildings and restoration projects in the Islamic world (alas, it 
has since ceased publication). Another royal, the Prince of Wales, 
was then making waves with attacks on modern architecture that were 
little more than dim appeals to reactionary taste. Like the British 
prince, the Aga Kahn sought to build upon architectural traditions 
But his approach was dramatically different. Instead of villainizing 
modernity as the enemy of history, he grasped that modernization is 
a part of history. He perceived that nothing historically significant 
could be achieved by merely hating the present. The British and the 
Ismaili prince share one overarching concern: the withdrawal of architecture's 
sacred dimension from the public realm. Architecture is traditionally 
an art form of the rich, but it is also a medium that since prehistoric 
times has been used to stake a place for spiritual values in everyday 
life. As recently as the late 19th century, the design of ecclesiastical 
buildings played a central role in British architectural discourse. 
Today that focus has all but vanished. The extent to which its disappearance 
has made ours a time of mourning is perhaps not fully realized. I 
went to Turkey to look at a small group of projects that have received 
the Aga Khan Award for architecture over the years. My itinerary included 
a mosque in Ankara, a reforestation program outside the Turkish capital, 
a park in Istanbul and a group of vacation houses in the Aegean resort 
town of Bodrum, under the guidance of Suhah Ascan, an architect who 
directs the program from the Geneva offices of the Aga Khan Trust 
for Culture. Turkey is not, as a matter of fact, a center of Ismaili 
life. Since 1922 it has been ruled, if at times tenuously, by a secular 
government. But, as a country that has long symbolized the threshhold 
between East and West, it is steeped in the cross-cultural spirit 
that guides the awards program. I wanted to look at buildings outside 
the superpower frame of reference, to step outside the membrane that 
has come to enclose much of American architecture within the environment 
of consumer fantasy. What drew me to the awards program initially 
was the belief that the end of the cold war had precipitated a crisis 
for American architecture, urbanism, and those who write about these 
fields. After World War II, architects enjoyed substantial moral authority, 
a reflection of their simultaneous commitment to creative discipline 
and social responsibility. Much of that authority has evaporated. 
Today, American architecture often resembles an infernal bubble machine 
run by evil clowns. Amusement parks with swan hotels, Egyptian gambling 
casinos, pseudo-urban shopping malls, gated communities, pasteboard 
versions of history with comic book historians to endorse them. It 
is as if all the energy once exerted to contain Soviet aggression 
has imploded, enclosing the world's superpower within the bubbular 
fantasy that a changing world can be understood by dominating it, 
monitoring it, contacting it through cyberspace. I'm finding it hard 
to focus on the architecture because I can't figure out why Can is 
still wearing his tan loafers. We're in a mosque, for heaven's sake. 
I've left my shoes outside, and I'm not even Muslim. Is Can trying 
to make a statement? Or perhaps the gaffe is mine. Maybe you're supposed 
to wear shoes in a mosque attached to the Turkish equivalent of our 
Capitol building: the legislative heart of a modern secular state. 
Both are reasonable conjectures. The building itself makes a political 
statement. It was deliberately designed to reinforce the secular government 
against those who would see Turkey ruled by clerical law. Designed 
by Behruz Cinici, in association with his son, the stubbornly shod 
Can, the concrete building is situated on the secular equivalent of 
sacred soil. The assembly's 1930s buildings, in modern classical style, 
embody the political legacy of Ataturk, modern Turkey's founder. Cinici, 
a student of the assembly's architect, declared he would not design 
a conventional mosque on Ataturk's land. Critics of Mies van der Rohe's 
design for the Illinois Institution of Technology campus once complained 
that you can't distinguish the chapel from the boiler plant. The assembly's 
mosque distances itself even further from the conventions of sacred 
architecture. It deliberately inverts the elements of traditional 
mosque design. In many mosques, the entrance is approached through 
an open arcade that partly screens the main facade. Here, there is 
nothing but a long row of concrete pedestals _ symbolic bases of the 
columns that the architects have declined to provide. Instead of a 
dome, the roof mounts in low steps to form an elongated ziggurat. 
Clerestories between the levels admit light into the prayer hall below. 
On the right side of the building, where a minaret would typically 
rise, a set of steps leads up to two platforms, both open to the sky. 
The mosque's most unconventional element is visible from within the 
prayer hall. Instead of facing a solid wall, kneeling worshipers face 
a large glass window and, beyond it, a sumptuous, multilevel sunken 
garden with pools, fountains, trees, a waterfall and a profusion of 
water plants. It is a representation of paradise, an image of the 
afterlife to which devout Muslims aspire. Can Cinici tells me that 
for Muslims, life is a threshhold at which we stand, preparing ourselves 
throughout life, through faith and devotion, for entrance into heaven. 
The Canicis designed an architectural interpretation of that theshhold. 
Beyond the garden, one beholds the earth berm, an intimation of death 
and burial. I like the threshhold image, not only as a key to this 
building's meaning, but as a metaphor for the awards program itself, 
as a doorway into realms of deeper understanding of the post-cold 
war world. The awards are presented every three years, after a selection 
process that is elaborate, well-financed and rigorous. Several hundred 
nominations are proposed by a network of architects and critics throughout 
the Islamic world. An international master jury meets in Geneva to 
review the nominees and make an initial cut. Experts conduct extensive 
field research on the finalists. The jury picks the winners at a second 
review in Geneva six months later. The composition of the master jury 
changes with each cycle. Over the years, non-Muslims on the panel 
have included Charles Corea, Peter Eisenman, Frank Gehry, Hans Hollein, 
Fumihiko Maki, Charles Moore, Alvaro Siza, James Stirling, Kenzo Tange 
and Robert Venturi. Excerpts from the jury's deliberations are published 
in book form. These are adding up to a permanent record of the impact 
of global change on the art of creating place. But why is Can still 
wearing his shoes? (Because, I later learned, he was flustered by 
showing a Western journalist around his building.) Or, why does this 
building continue to cause anxiety? Just months before my trip, last 
year, the Turkish military intervened to prevent the ruling party 
from mandating religious education in the nation's public schools. 
The ground occupied by the mosque, in other words, is contested as 
well as sacred space. Here, formal invention serves architecture's 
unparalleled power to open the pores to history and meaning. Since 
1961, one million trees have been planted annually on the hills outside 
Ankara: pine, cedar, oak, poplar, almond and plum. The 11,000-acre-plus 
project of the Middle East Technical Institute has altered the city's 
climate, creating milder winters and summers and helping to decrease 
air pollution. The forest has also become a haven for abundant life 
and an oasis for the eyes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>