<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0175 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Metaphorically speaking, siding is the skin of a house. It serves 
two functions: it protects the house from the elements, insects and 
rodents and adds style and beauty to the exterior of the house. Siding 
can be made of wood, vinyl or metal. Many manufacturers claim that 
modern siding materials, vinyl and metal, are maintenance-free. Indeed 
they do require less care than wood siding but still these materials 
are vulnerable to the the environment. No matter what the material, 
it's important to inspect the siding yearly because, sooner or later, 
it will need some maintenance and repair. Obviously, it is best to 
find minor problems before they mushroom into major headaches. As 
you walk around your house, look at all surfaces but especially at 
those areas most likely to develop problems. These include the corners 
near the roof, areas butting the door or window trim and those sections 
that mate with the foundation. At one time, wood was the most common 
material used for clapboard siding. It was plentiful, easy to work 
and provided good insulation, but wood siding requires more maintenance 
than other materials. It must be painted or stained to withstand the 
onslaughts of weather and insects and it is more likely to split than 
other materials. The durability of wooden clapboard siding depends 
largely on the type of wood used. Most siding is made of softwood, 
like pine or fir. Older houses have boards cut from massive first-growth 
trees. This wood has a dense cellular structure that makes it remarkably 
rot-resistant. Newer wood, cut from second- and third-growth trees, 
is less durable. When inspecting wooden siding, first look for structural 
defects like warps, cracks or splits in the boards. These should be 
repaired before repainting. Boards that are warped away from the house 
should be straightened because they offer a gap that insects find 
desirable as nesting sites. Flatten these boards by driving long, 
galvanized deck screws through them into the sheathing or studs behind. 
Cracks or splits in the boards are not difficult to repair. Pry open 
the crack with a screwdriver _ be careful not to overdo this or you 
will split the entire board apart _ then coat both sides with epoxy 
wood glue and squeeze the board back together. It may be necessary 
to wedge a piece of scrap lumber against the bottom edge of the board 
to keep the crack from opening up before the glue sets. Setting up 
a wedge is easy enough if the cracked board is close to the ground. 
For a crack that is higher up, you will have to hold the parts together 
by driving galvanized deck screws into the board on either side of 
the crack. A board that is badly split or has a piece missing should 
be replaced. It is not necessary, however, to pull out the entire 
length of siding. Instead the damaged section can be cut loose and 
replaced with a new piece. Drive wedges under the board to raise it 
away from the wall, then use a backsaw to make cuts on either side 
of the damage. Before sawing, set a block of scrap wood on the siding 
below to protect it from the blade. The backsaw cannot cut completely 
through the damaged siding because the top will be covered by an overlapping 
board. Switch to a keyhole saw and push the narrow blade under the 
overlap to finish the cut. After making the cuts, you should be able 
to pull the section out. If it proves stubborn, there may be a few 
hidden nails anchoring it to the wall. Pry the board up with a wrecking 
bar to expose these nails, then cut them with a mini-hacksaw. If you 
cannot find the nails, use a wood chisel to break up the section and 
remove it in pieces. Be careful with the chisel so you don't damage 
the adjacent boards or the building felt. Cut a new piece of clapboard 
to length and coat the ends with primer. Before pushing this new board 
into place, examine the building felt on the wall for rips or tears. 
Patch any defects with new pieces of felt. Tap the new board in place 
and secure it with finishing nails. If you have to nail close to the 
ends of the board, drill pilot holes first to keep the board from 
splitting. Countersink the nail heads and fill the holes with wood 
filler. Caulk the seams on either side of the new board and paint 
it to match the surrounding boards. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>