<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0453 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As he waited for curtain calls at the gala closing of the old Metropolitan 
Opera House in 1966, Martin Fredmann, 23, then a dancer with the Metropolitan 
Opera Ballet, felt a pinch on his bottom. He turned to discover Martha 
Graham. She gave him a big wink. It was the only time Fredmann met 
Graham. Now artistic director of Colorado Ballet in Denver, he could 
probably use another pinch and wink. The improbable irony of the intervening 
years is that Fredmann, whose background is in classical ballet, is 
a lynch pin in an experiment that might give Graham's modern-dance 
repertory a more secure lease on life. Next weekend Colorado Ballet 
presents the first major production by an American ballet company 
of a Graham work when it performs ``Appalachian Spring.'' Selected 
Graham pieces have been staged by European ballet companies (Paris 
Opera Ballet, Dutch National Ballet) and modern-dance troupes in Israel. 
This is the first time that ``Appalachian Spring,'' created in 1944 
with a commissioned score that won Aaron Copland a Pulitzer Prize, 
will be performed by any troupe outside the Martha Graham Dance Company 
itself. The Colorado production also coincides with licensing arrangements 
for Graham's works under the newly formed Graham Trust. The Graham 
company, although more financially pressed than usual in recent years, 
does not depend on this formal licensing mechanism for its survival. 
But royalties and licensing fees can plow revenue back into the company. 
The question is whether a regional ballet company like Colorado Ballet 
can properly perform Graham's nonballetic idiom and thus pave the 
way for similar companies to stage Graham performances. (Two other 
companies, Hartford Ballet and the Peter Sparling Company in Ann Arbor, 
Mich., run by former Graham dancers, have also been licensed to do 
Graham works.) The stakes, not to mention the literal pain of the 
intense training Colorado Ballet has undergone since early September, 
are keeping more than a few people up at night. ``We're not going 
to mess up,'' said Fredmann, whose flashing blue eyes underscore his 
swift-talking, shoot-from-the-hip personality. Despite his anxiety, 
he has declared this Graham experiment to be the most enlightening 
experience of his dance life. ``I care about it too much, too deeply, 
and everybody who's involved cares about it too much and too deeply,'' 
he said. The honor will cost Fredmann's company about $30,000, not 
including dancers' salaries, for six performances. Under his agreement 
with the Graham Trust, ``Appalachian Spring,'' an ode to the spirit 
and land of the American West, is licensed to him for two years. There 
are additional charges for performances in its second year. Fredmann 
would not divulge the exact licensing fee, other than to say that 
it is more than he normally pays for pieces from the similarly constructed 
Balanchine Trust. His agreement with the Graham Trust includes acquiring 
two more works in the next five years. Colorado Ballet is ostensibly 
an odd choice to initiate the Trust. About a third of its dancers 
come from areas once part of the Soviet Union; all are classically 
trained. The catalyst in this odd union was Richard Philp, editor 
in chief of Dance magazine; he is a friend to both Fredmann and Ron 
Protas, the artistic director of the Graham company, who acquired 
the rights to Graham's works after her death in 1991. Protas was enthusiastic 
about a regional company's performing Graham's dances. ``I felt that 
a lot of the power and creativity in dance today is in the regional 
area,'' Protas explained. ``I met Martin and I knew some of their 
work. And I like him and I liked them and I went out to see the company 
with Janet'' _ Janet Eilber, artistic co-director of the Trust _ ``and 
I felt their freshness and their openness. And Martin is very dedicated, 
very passionate, and would kill himself to maintain standards. I would 
not have let them do `Appalachian Spring' if I thought they couldn't.'' 
Which didn't exactly allay Fredmann's fears that his company couldn't 
pull off a quality performance. But Protas reassured him. As Fredmann 
recalled it: ``He said, `Don't worry.' He said, `I don't expect you 
to do it like Graham; you're Colorado Ballet.' He said, `Yes, I want 
you to do it well with the motivation, the understanding, the dramatic 
depth.' But he said: `The only way this work is going to live and 
continue is that it continues to grow. And each company will do it 
the way each company does it. It's not going to be museumized. No 
work is. ``Sleeping Beauty'' isn't done that way. Beethoven's not 
played that way. It's the same great music, the same great Martha.' 
'' The notion of a ballet company's doing a Graham piece is not far-fetched. 
``Appalachian Spring,'' which was Fredmann's choice, was choreographed 
with Erick Hawkins, a ballet dancer in the lead male role. Mikhail 
Baryshnikov and Rudolf Nureyev have danced the piece with the Graham 
company. The Colorado dancers had been warned by Meelis Pakri, a company 
member, about the rigors of Graham technique. He had danced the husbandman's 
role in May in the Graham company's 54th-anniversary performance of 
``Appalachian Spring'' at the Library of Congress. He will reprise 
the role with Colorado. But within days, the technique's pelvic contraction 
and release, spiral-based movement, floor-centered style and clear 
but sweeping focus left Colorado dancers with hamstring muscles so 
sore they could barely climb steps. Kneepads were common at rehearsal 
as dancers learned Graham's knee-based movements. ``What doesn't hurt?'' 
the dancers responded in unison to the question of their physical 
well-being two weeks into their six-week rehearsal. Gregory Gonzales, 
dancing the revivalist's role, pointed to a pinhead-size spot and 
said, ``This place on my elbow doesn't hurt.'' He grinned. But it 
was no laughing matter for Maria Mosina, the Bolshoi-trained ballerina 
selected to dance the bride's role. She was so distressed after the 
first few days of training that she wanted to quit. ``It's like a 
foreign language to us,'' she said with translation assistance from 
Pakri. ``Basically, all the motions are in opposition to ballet.'' 
Terese Capucilli, a nearly 20-year veteran of the Graham company and 
a noted interpreter of Graham's own roles, directed the first two 
weeks of rehearsal, which included technique training and setting 
the ballet. It was followed by coaching from Joyce Herring, a former 
Graham dancer, and touch-up work by Protas. ``You have to realize,'' 
Ms. Capucilli said, ``a Russian ballerina, suddenly looking at herself 
in the mirror with an inverted leg and a contraction in her body when 
she's trained for years and years to do just the opposite. Maria came 
around when we started to really get into the core of her work and 
when she started to understand where the technique, as it applies 
to `Spring,' could help her through.'' Ms. Capucilli told the Colorado 
dancers that she did not intend to make Graham dancers out of them. 
Rather, she wanted to instill in them the basic Graham technique needed 
specifically for ``Appalachian Spring'' and then work with them from 
the emotional inner life of the piece, which was always most important 
to Graham anyway. ``I told the dancers right off,'' she said, ``that 
I was not interested in superficially placing movement on their bodies, 
but to take what these dancers know as artists. They're very beautifully 
trained ballet dancers. What they know about the stage, what they 
know about standing on one leg, does not change when the top leg becomes 
a parallel leg or when the contraction takes the breath out of the 
body.'' Protas had given Ms. Capucilli license to make some adjustments 
to suit Colorado Ballet's abilities, but it was unnecessary. By the 
end of her two weeks, the dancers, sore as they were, had the movement 
down, even if they had not yet found the freedom to give the piece 
the earthbound yet soaring tones that punctuate it. Even more daunting 
to Ms. Capucilli, an intense and deeply passionate perfectionist trained 
by Graham herself, was the weight of the responsibility she felt to 
succeed with Colorado Ballet. ``It was very frightening coming here,'' 
she said. ``Martha's work can withstand bad interpretation, but I 
wasn't willing to think that it would go that route. The only thing 
I could do as the person who is staging this work was to set the highest 
goals for myself, for the work, for the company, otherwise I could 
not live with it, live with the fear. ``The only way I could do that 
was to give them a piece of my heart and what it is I love about the 
technique and love about the work so that they could somehow find 
a place for themselves in it. I can only tear my soul apart for them 
to see.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>