<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The laptop in front of me looked as if it was running Wordperfect, 
the mouse felt as if it was interacting with a copy of Wordperfect, 
and for all intents and purposes, it (italics)was(end italics) Wordperfect. 
The difference was hidden: there was no Microsoft foundation supporting 
the product. This laptop _ an IBM 486 Thinkpad provided by the Corel 
Corp., the makers of Wordperfect _ ran the Linux operating system. 
And Wordperfect worked fine. Wordperfect, one of the popular word-processing 
programs developed at the beginning of the desktop PC explosion, is 
one of the last rivals left to challenge Microsoft in the world of 
office automation. So no one is surprised that Corel is looking for 
ways to thwart Microsoft's domination. One strategy is to make sure 
that people can use Wordperfect with any one of the non-Microsoft 
options left. A writer tapping away won't notice the difference between 
using the word processor on a Linux machine or using it on one with 
a Microsoft operating system. The letters keep popping up after the 
keys are hit. The paragraphs are still aligned, formatted, tabulated 
and indexed in the same way. The process of producing the document 
is remarkably similar. Still, differences emerge from time to time. 
Using a Linux-run machine with Wordperfect is much like spending time 
in Europe, where the plugs, switches and everything else is slightly 
different. Linux, for instance, stores paths to files with forward 
slashes, not the back slashes used in Microsoft products. Most of 
these minor details shouldn't be too hard for experienced users to 
relearn. Novices and people who live in mortal fear of pushing the 
wrong button, however, could be driven nuts by such things. There 
are more substantial differences as well. Macintosh and Windows machines, 
for example, keep fonts in a central repository where all programs 
can use them. But Linux lacks a central bank for fonts, and they may 
not be available for all software on the system. (Wordperfect comes 
with its own batch of fonts that aren't installed for other programs, 
in part because of licensing restrictions.) Differences like these 
require a bit more learning to work around, but none are crippling. 
There are also surprising similarities. Wordperfect runs under a version 
of X Windows, a non-Microsoft program, known as Kde that handles much 
of the same thing as Microsoft Windows. Some features are strikingly 
similar to those of Windows, which makes life easier for novices moving 
to the platform. There is a task bar and a button that works much 
like the Windows Start button. They're close enough that Microsoft 
might wonder why it worked so hard to defeat Apple's claim that the 
look and feel of a product could be copyrighted. One hidden benefit 
of Linux may be in the lower demands it makes on computers. Many users 
run Linux and Wordperfect on older 486-based computers. Still, people 
who choose to use Linux and Wordperfect need to adopt a bit of a frontier 
settler's mentality. The products are not dressed up with the musical 
notes or splashy graphics that accompany Microsoft and Apple products. 
In fact, the machines start up with thousands of tiny messages filled 
with words like ``SNMP'' and ``daemon'' _ which can be safely ignored. 
Michael C.J. Cowpland, chief executive of Corel, said the company 
was working to make it as easy as possible to switch to Linux. It 
is developing a product line known as Netwinder that will bundle Wordperfect 
and other products, like spreadsheets and browsers, into one computer 
running Linux. That will be available in late fall or early winter. 
Wordperfect 8 will be released this fall. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>