<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0387 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The dollar plunged 8.1 percent against the Japanese yen on Wednesday, 
its biggest one-day decline in 25 years. But this spectacular drop 
in the foreign-exchange market was not triggered by a new belief among 
investors that Japan was on the verge of turning its troubled economy 
around, traders and analysts said. If that were the case, the fall 
of the dollar could be seen as positive, as the end of the recession 
in Japan would help lead the rest of Asia out of its slump. Instead, 
the traders and analysts said, the selloff seemed to be set off by 
a new rush of hedge funds and other investors to get out of bets against 
the Japanese currency that had been very profitable until two months 
ago. Much of this selling reflects an unwillingness among hedge funds 
and other investors to take much risk _ or stick with relatively small 
losses for long _ in the current global financial crisis, even if 
they think the dollar will rebound from this plunge. ``In this risk-averse 
environment, people are just getting out,'' said Avinash Persaud, 
the global head of currency research at J.P. Morgan Securities in 
London. ``All the people selling today believe the dollar should go 
up against the yen, but they can't tolerate the loss.'' Most of the 
selloff happened during the trading day in Europe, rather than in 
Tokyo, where the yen got no boost even though the government neared 
approval of a plan to rescue the country's banking system and the 
stock market rallied. Traders and analysts said much of the selling 
was reinforced by talk of major selling by two hedge funds _ Long-Term 
Capital Management LP, which had to be rescued last month with an 
infusion of $3.6 billion, and Tiger Management LLC, which is run by 
Julian Robertson, a well-known hedge-fund manager. A spokesman for 
Long-Term Capital denied that it was selling dollars for yen. A spokesman 
for Tiger Management would not comment. But it is generally known 
that Robertson has made major bets that the yen would continue to 
weaken and that Japanese bank stocks would fall. And traders said 
they did see Tiger selling on Wednesday, as Japanese bank stocks rebounded 
and the yen rallied. Traders also said there was a lot of selling 
after the dollar fell below 130 yen, 128 yen and 127 yen, levels where 
many derivatives based on a dollar-yen trade forced selling. The recent 
cut in interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board and the prospect 
of more is also weighing on the dollar. In late trading in New York, 
the dollar cost 120.25 yen, down from 130.85 yen Tuesday, its steepest 
one-day fall since 1973, according to Bloomberg News. The dollar also 
fell against other currencies, but not nearly as much. Against the 
German mark, the dollar was down 1 percent to 1.6138 marks, from 1.63 
marks Tuesday. While the dollar is off 18.3 percent against the yen 
since Aug. 11 and 11.7 percent against the mark since July 9, it had 
held up well against other currencies, including the Mexican peso 
and the Canadian dollar, currencies of two of the United States' largest 
trading partners. But the trade-weighted dollar, which reflects the 
dollar's value adjusted for the amount of trade with each country, 
dropped 2.3 percent Wednesday, according to the index kept by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and is down 5.4 percent since Aug. 
28. Analysts said that the aversion to taking even minimal risk in 
the current financial climate _ in which investors are bringing their 
money home and banks are less willing to make loans _ could be the 
catalyst that slows the world economy even more and even pushes the 
U.S. economy into a recession. Even though Alan Greenspan, the chairman 
of the Federal Reserve, said Wednesday that there was not a credit 
crunch, analysts and economists are talking about it more every day. 
``There is no good reason to change our mind that the risks for the 
global economy remain on the downside,'' John Lipsky, chief economist 
at Chase Manhattan Bank, said. In less turbulent circumstances, the 
fall of the dollar could be positive for the U.S. economy and for 
other countries. A weaker dollar would make U.S. exports cheaper, 
helping reverse the sharp slide in this sector since the demand from 
Asia dried up with the economic crisis that erupted 15 months ago. 
In addition, a weaker dollar could help make commodities more attractive 
by lowering their price to consumers in the rest of the world. Because 
most commodities are priced in dollars, a weaker dollar makes them 
less expensive in other currencies. Stronger commodity prices could 
help many of the world's troubled economies, like Russia's, that are 
major exporters of commodities. But analysts are worried that the 
current slide of the dollar will have little benefit if the U.S. economy 
is slowing sharply and, in turn, makes things more difficult for other 
countries. In this circumstance, demand for U.S. exports and commodities 
would be likely to fall in a worldwide slowdown, even if a weaker 
dollar makes them cheaper. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>