<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0266 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Playing Beethoven is one of the two most important things a symphony 
orchestra has to do, along with performing new works. We need to keep 
going back to Beethoven. And we need to keep thinking about why we 
need to keep going back. Opportunities to go back, but not so much 
to think about why, were recently offered by the New York Philharmonic 
and its music director, Kurt Masur. Their season-opening Beethoven 
cycle was, remarkably, the Philharmonic's first compact presentation 
of the Beethoven symphonies since Toscanini conducted the works in 
the orchestra's centenary year, 1942. A lot has happened since 1942. 
Increased knowledge of Beethoven's contemporaries has enhanced our 
awareness both of how far he stood apart and of how close he was to 
other composers of his age in his Romantic urgings and his revolutionary 
hopes. As Masur remarked in an interview printed in the program book 
for these concerts, Beethoven ``knew the works of the French composers 
of that time very well'' and ``even quotes a march by the French revolutionary 
composer Gossec'' in the finale of the Seventh Symphony. Other relationships 
could have been cited, along with ways in which Beethoven was alone: 
alone, for example, in how decisively he brought motivic development, 
harmonic movement, rhythmic force and dynamic emphasis together to 
execute an ideal of progress that made the French composer's music 
sound just well intentioned. Another change in the musical world since 
1942 has been the enormous growth in understanding how Beethoven's 
music was played when it was new. Yet another, reflected especially 
in critical writing of the last decade or so, has been the revelation 
that Beethoven's pinnacle position in classical music was a product 
not just of solitary genius but also of a process going on in his 
society. With new forms of communication _ printed music, open concerts, 
the parlor piano, music criticism _ the new and broader musical public 
needed to have not only the classics but a great composer it could 
acclaim as its own. Beethoven was at hand. By 1842, when the Philharmonic 
played his Fifth Symphony at the start of its first concert, he was 
firmly established at the center of another innovation of the time: 
the orchestral repertory. Justly so, we might say. But we might not 
want simply to accept an estimation of Beethoven created in the early 
19th century. Hence the urge to get back to the source material, whether 
by imitating, more or less, the performance practices of Beethoven's 
time or by trying to comprehend his music in the context of other 
music of his age, by Gossec and the rest. We need not suppose that 
by such means we could ever hear Beethoven truly afresh. Nor is it 
likely that his music will come to seem any less extraordinary and 
important. But at least we might start, in some small way, making 
our own decisions. The Philharmonic declined these avenues to a rehearing 
of Beethoven. Instead of programming the symphonies alongside other 
works that could have made us consider their musical progenitors and 
environments, the orchestra left them as independent, mighty mountains. 
And little had been learned from all the research into the scale of 
Beethoven's orchestras or the way instruments of his period spoke. 
Masur used the new Peters editions, and his tempos for scherzos and 
finales were often fast, in the spirit of Beethoven's metronome markings 
(at least at the performances I heard, of the First, Fourth and Fifth 
Symphonies). But the players showed no evidence of trying to adapt 
to early-19th-century requirements, and the orchestra was big and 
overbalanced in favor of the string section. In the last movement 
of the Fifth, for instance, the piccolo sounded like a caged bird, 
battering its wings against the bars of the 60 strings. Another item 
in the program book disclosed that Masur, during his 26 years as Kapellmeister 
of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, included Beethoven in 63 percent 
of his subscription evenings and gave, astonishingly, 111 performances 
of the Seventh Symphony: one every three months, every ninth concert. 
Experience tells. Masur knows how this music works and how to convey 
its vigorous gestures. The stirring motions he makes with his left 
arm, and the sways, shakes and shudders in his body all confirm his 
close involvement in the moment-to-moment noise and urgency of the 
music, even if the shape of the whole movement, the whole symphony, 
is not being so strongly communicated. Part of his problem at these 
concerts was that the orchestra did not seem very interested in what 
was going on. Where Masur was projecting compulsion and excitement, 
from the musicians came bald, unfeeling playing, coarse tone and loose 
entries. But part of the problem, too, is the loss of faith we may 
feel in a traditional approach, with a scale and style of playing 
that have come down by tradition, offered in programs that just reinforce 
a traditional sense of Beethoven's greatness. Under such circumstances 
it might have been hard even for Masur, even with an orchestra fully 
engaged, to make us hear the music again and not merely be reminded 
of it. Yes, the hall was full and the crowd enthusiastic. After all, 
to be reminded of Beethoven is not such a bad thing. But the Philharmonic's 
next Beethoven cycle _ which, let us hope, will come before 56 years 
have passed _ will have some work to do. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>