<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton plans to announce several steps this week to help 
Medicare beneficiaries being dropped from health maintenance organizations 
and is determined to halt the exodus of HMOs from the program, White 
House officials said Wednesday. The officials said Clinton was surprised 
to learn that dozens of HMOs were scaling back their Medicare operations, 
in part because costs were higher and Medicare payments lower than 
they had expected. The president's intervention represents a swift 
turnabout for the administration, which initially played down the 
significance of the HMO actions, saying they were mere business decisions. 
Administration officials said they had underestimated the number of 
HMOs that would withdraw from Medicare. HMOs are pulling out of more 
than 300 counties in at least 22 states. The changes will directly 
affect more than 400,000 people _ one out of every 15 beneficiaries 
now enrolled in HMOs. Patients dropped from HMOs often have to scramble 
to find new doctors and arrange for new insurance, sometimes at a 
higher cost. Over the weekend, alarm bells sounded on the political 
side of the White House, and on Wednesday, Clinton aides said they 
feared a backlash by tens of thousands of angry beneficiaries. Moreover, 
White House officials said they were worried that other beneficiaries 
would lose confidence in managed care organizations, which were once 
thought to be the hope for the future of Medicare. On Thursday, Clinton 
will announce what he describes as ``a three-part initiative to respond 
to decisions by some HMOs to drop out'' of Medicare. The president 
will encourage new HMOs to enter the counties from which other health 
plans are departing, and he will order Medicare officials to review 
the new applications as quickly as possible. A White House memorandum 
says: ``The Health Care Financing Administration will expedite its 
review and approval of HMOs seeking to enter markets that have been 
left without a managed care option. Any such applications will receive 
first priority for review.'' HMOs pulling out of a particular county 
will not be eligible for this special treatment if they want to re-enter 
the market there. But federal officials said they would make every 
effort to approve applications from new HMOs by Jan. 1. This would 
allow beneficiaries to switch directly from one HMO to another. In 
addition, a White House official said Clinton would ask Health and 
Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala to prepare legislation to ``make 
sure this never happens again.'' The purpose of the legislation, according 
to the White House memorandum, is to ``assure an adequate range of 
health plan options for beneficiaries and reduce the likelihood that 
they will face this kind of turmoil in the future.'' The White House 
will also begin a nationwide campaign to inform people age 65 or older 
that if they are dropped from an HMO, they can enroll in the original 
Medicare program, can buy private insurance to fill gaps in Medicare 
and may not be denied such Medigap coverage because of medical problems. 
Clinton will criticize HMOs that drop out of Medicare, saying they 
have abandoned their commitment to the elderly. He will also reiterate 
the administration's refusal to let health plans raise premiums or 
reduce benefits for Medicare patients, a matter over which the administration 
refused last week to negotiate with HMOs. ``Medicare should not and 
will not be held hostage to threats by HMOs to leave the program,'' 
says a White House memorandum summarizing what the president intends 
to say on Thursday. Some members of Congress said their offices had 
been inundated with calls from Medicare beneficiaries being dropped 
by HMOs. One of those lawmakers, Sen. William Roth, R-Del., chairman 
of the Finance Committee, said the Medicare agency's refusal to negotiate 
with HMOs last week was ``shortsighted and highly regrettable.'' HMOs 
pulling out of Medicare said that costs were higher than expected 
and new federal rules more burdensome than expected, pushing compliance 
costs higher. Medicare HMOs receive payments that vary widely, from 
a low of $367 a month for a beneficiary in some rural counties to 
more than $700 a month in Miami and parts of New York City, including 
Manhattan. Payments are computed according to a complex formula set 
by law. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>