<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the Orleans Hotel and Casino, a blocky behemoth a mile or so off 
the famous Strip and a notch or two down the luxury ladder, the first 
Las Vegas Film Festival concluded on a recent weekend with a fitting 
bit of self-celebration. The honoree at the closing-night banquet 
was the director George Sidney, a local resident whose signature film 
was ``Viva Las Vegas,'' a 1964 vehicle for Elvis Presley and Ann-Margret. 
A day or two earlier, Gov. Bob Miller appeared at the Rio Suites Hotel 
and Casino to announce the arrival in November, in the Rio's own gallery, 
of an exhibition of Romanov dynasty art objects from the czars' summer 
palace at Peterhof, outside St. Petersburg. ``In our lifetime,'' said 
Miller at a poolside news conference, ``we will never have another 
exhibit like this.'' And of course the entire city, if not the world, 
is aware by now that the Bellagio Hotel, Stephen Wynn's $1.8 billion 
luxury palace, is set to open on Oct. 15, complete with a gallery 
for his own collection of modern masterworks by the likes of Miro, 
Pollock and de Kooning, and a Picasso-themed restaurant decorated 
with real Picassos. This mishmash of high art and low, the classy 
and the crass, is perhaps the newest wrinkle in a place known for 
making new wrinkles out of ideas born elsewhere. As the city's gaming 
industry faces increasing competition from other places with legalized 
gambling, the casino owners have begun to emphasize other attractions. 
The result is a clash between the casino culture and the small but 
increasingly active arts community, itself struggling for a toehold 
in a rapidly growing city. As Miller said at the Rio, ``If you don't 
have the arts, you don't have any soul whatsoever.'' So, yes, the 
arts do exist here, and it should not be surprising that they are 
growing. It is an inevitable consequence of the remarkable expansion 
of this city, which has ballooned to 1.2 million people from 795,000 
in 1990. There are a dozen or so fledgling theater companies in town. 
And for a variety of reasons, from the climate to cheap housing, the 
city has attracted visual artists who find a dizzying array of stimuli 
in the lovely desert surroundings, the cartoonish casino architecture 
that mimics and hyperbolizes famous landmarks from around the world, 
and the constant flow of visitors. ``Las Vegas is a simulacrum of 
simulacra,'' said Robert Beckmann, a painter who has lived in the 
city since 1977 and whose work has used imagery as diverse as nuclear 
test sites, the neon-saturated Strip and nearby mountainscapes. ``There 
is no place like it,'' he added. ``It's constantly cannibalizing not 
only the art of the world, but itself.'' But there is, alas, no escaping 
Vegas in Vegas, and because the arts, along with everything else, 
remain in the thrall of the casino culture, they have less of an independent 
presence here than perhaps in any other big city in the United States. 
As retirees have flocked here, as well as families in search of employment 
at the ever-multiplying casinos, this corner of the desert has bloomed 
with housing, and with it, the needs of residents for home-grown culture. 
The city programs dozens of free concerts and ethnic festivals in 
the parks; it also supports a children's theater and four cultural 
centers, which attract thousands of people every month to classes 
and performances. But this is still a place where the Liberace Museum 
gets more visitors than the natural history and children's museums 
combined. The gaming industry is a noisy one, said Constance DeVereaux, 
executive director of the Allied Arts Council of Southern Nevada, 
a nonprofit organization with 65 arts groups under its regional umbrella, 
``and art tends to be very quiet. The arts do tend to be hidden from 
the local population.'' Casinos Upstaged Arts Community The council, 
whose mission is to promote arts awareness, was founded in 1961 and 
at one time published a lively newsletter, Arts Alive, 16 times a 
year. But as the casino industry boomed, the arts flagged, and by 
1991 the council had grown moribund. Ms. DeVereaux was hired two years 
ago to resuscitate it. ``We may have a thriving arts community, but 
we're very young and don't have the infrastructure that exists in 
other places,'' Ms. DeVereaux said. ``It's taken an influx of people 
to get us started, but the city has grown so fast it makes it hard 
to let people know what's going on.'' Indeed, the prevailing wisdom 
in Las Vegas is that a hungry audience exists for the arts, but no 
one knows where it is or how to tap into it. The Nevada Dance Theater, 
a 20-year-old ballet company, is thriving, but the symphony and the 
opera, once active, are now moribund. The University of Nevada at 
Las Vegas has a fine arts college with 1,600 students in art, architecture, 
dance, film, music and theater. It also has an 1,800-seat concert 
hall, where since 1977 it has been holding performances by artists 
including Yo Yo Ma, Isaac Stern and Jean-Pierre Rampal. But the theater 
is rarely filled. Plenty of Culture and Empty Seats ``I've heard since 
I've been here that this is a cultural wasteland,'' said Jeffrey Koep, 
the dean of the arts college, who came to Las Vegas in 1989. ``But 
that's not true. Culture is coming here; it's just that our house 
is not full. American Ballet Theater, Alvin Ailey, they did not sell 
out. For the Boston Pops there was a miserable turnout. If I have 
a mission, it's to get people in to see them. We've reached critical 
mass in our population, as opposed to 1989, but obviously we're still 
in our adolescence in making the arts bloom.'' The city's principal 
art collector is Wynn, the resort tycoon, whose gallery is advertised 
on the Bellagio marquee on the Strip, in a sign treating the artists 
with same reverence accorded Siegfried and Roy _ ``Now appearing: 
Van Gogh, Monet, Cezanne, Picasso.'' Wynn's collection has been valued 
at more than $300 million. The Las Vegas Art Museum, which moved into 
its own space for the first time a year and a half ago, shares quarters 
with a library in a new building in the far western reaches of the 
city and has a budget of only about $300,000 a year. The museum couldn't 
afford to buy a detail from one of Wynn's paintings. In a city that 
bills itself as ``the entertainment capital of the world,'' membership 
in the musicians union has declined from 2,200 in 1979 to 850 today, 
largely because the hotels and casinos on the Strip now use taped 
or synthesized music instead of orchestras. The 12-year-old Actors 
Repertory Theater, the city's largest theater company, drew more people 
last year to ``Jeffrey,'' Paul Rudnick's comedy about the dating life 
of a gay man in the age of AIDS, than it did to ``Annie.'' Georgia 
Neu, the company's artistic director, is one of several people who 
lamented the lack of support for local arts groups by the government 
and the casinos. The city of Las Vegas supports its own programs but 
makes no grants; the state arts council, with the backing of the governor, 
has almost tripled its budget in the last five years, but it only 
recently opened a branch office in Las Vegas. ``It's pathetic here, 
pathetic,'' Ms. Neu said, noting that ``there are dozens and dozens 
of casinos giving nothing back to the community.'' Some casinos do, 
actually, support the arts in a modest way (Joseph Palermo, president 
of the Las Vegas Arts Museum, named the Santa Fe and the now-under-construction 
Venetian as donors). But in any case, the role of the casinos in the 
arts is changing as they are beginning to participate in arts presentation, 
motivated by the changing profile of the Las Vegas visitor. The city 
remains, of course, a glittering Oz for tourists; an astounding 30.5 
million people visited last year. But surveys last year by the Las 
Vegas Convention and Visitors Bureau showed that for the first time, 
more people say they come here for the entertainment than for the 
casinos. For the hotel-casino owners, this means expanding what they 
offer to attract customers and to keep them within the walls of their 
hotels once they get there. In his office at the Mirage Hotel, surrounded 
by the work of Pollock, de Kooning and Jasper Johns, Wynn agreed that 
the casinos were leading the way. ``Why do I think of fine art as 
being properly presented in a resort hotel in Las Vegas?'' Wynn asked. 
He answered himself. ``The image of our city is so established that 
it's quite difficult to amend it.'' But, he continued, the Bellagio 
was conceived ``as a hotel of distinction in absolute terms, one of 
the loveliest places to visit, in any century, on any continent. If 
we can achieve that high-sounding goal, we would be making the pie 
here bigger.'' Wynn is not alone. In addition to the Russian exhibit, 
the Rio Suite Hotel and Casino has commissioned and displayed the 
work of 20 Nevada artists, and Harrah's and the Hilton followed suit. 
Sam's Town, a hotel and casino in the southeast part of the city, 
has been inviting local artists into its courtyard to paint and sell 
their work. ``I think this is redefining where art can be viewed,'' 
said Robert Tracy, the assistant dean of the fine arts college. ``And 
it will help redefine the city as a place of connoisseurs.'' But others 
wonder whether the casino exhibits will steal audiences from the starving 
galleries and museum. ``If a casino can bring art inside, that's one 
less reason for tourists to go out,'' said Ms. DeVereaux of the arts 
council. ``What do you get from art in a casino? I'm not sure. If 
you get buyers, that's great. But I'm not sure I want to celebrate 
art in casinos.'' An Artsy Scene With a Vegas Twist For Ms. DeVereaux 
and others, the alternative was provided at the annual auction for 
the Nevada Institute for Contemporary Art, which drew some 200 people 
downtown on a recent Friday evening. Gallery owners, artists, arts 
agency administrators, university faculty members and a handful of 
government officials gathered at the Arts Factory, a warehouselike 
building that holds several commercial galleries. The event, featuring 
the donated work of 61 local painters and sculptors, raised $40,000 
for the institute, known locally as NICA, a 12-year-old nonprofit 
gallery that is generally acknowledged to be the most serious in town. 
This was its sixth auction, but the first not held at a casino, mainly 
because the institute, which is now located in a roadside mall a few 
miles away, is to move to the Arts Factory next spring. The hope is 
that by consolidating the city's arts community downtown, an arts 
district that is geographically and spiritually distinct from the 
Strip will take root. So instead of tuxes and sequined gowns, the 
attendees were dressed more casually. The atmosphere was more SoHo 
than the Strip, more arty than kitschy _ at least until the sale began. 
Then, as the auctioneer called lot No. 1, the first painting was carried 
out and displayed by a woman who was naked except for body paint and 
a tiny G-string. Lot No. 2 was presented by a similarly unattired 
man. Watching the proceedings, Jerry Schefcik, an art professor and 
the director of the university art gallery, grinned. He was a little 
pleased, a little embarrassed. ``Welcome to Las Vegas,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>