<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The number of Americans who died from AIDS fell to 16,865 last year, 
almost half the number of the year before and well below the 43,000 
deaths in the peak year of 1995, government figures released Wednesday 
show. The increased access to new and effective drug treatments took 
the death rate from AIDS to the lowest since 1987, the first year 
epidemiologists tracked mortality data related to the disease. Researchers 
at the National Center for Health Statistics said that the number 
of deaths in 1997 decreased by 46.4 percent from the 31,130 people 
who died from the illness the year before. The fall in AIDS deaths 
was much steeper than the previous record decrease _ the 29 percent 
drop from 1995 to 1996. Still, other studies show that the annual 
rate of new infections of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, has remained 
stable at about 40,000 in the United States in recent years, which 
means that more and more people are living with the virus. But longer 
life means a greater chance of infecting others, officials said, and 
they expressed concern that the good news is bringing a complacency 
about the deadly disease. ``This reflects the tremendous power of 
the new combination drug therapies, the enormous effort to get the 
drugs to people and the huge federal effort to pay for these drugs,'' 
said Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna Shalala of the drop 
in AIDS deaths. ``What this also tells us is that we have serious 
problems when we have not brought down the rate of new infections.'' 
News of the drop in AIDS deaths is contained in the report on vital 
statistics, produced twice a year by the National Center for Heath 
Statistics. Based on an examination of birth and death records provided 
by the states, the latest report shows that many of the leading causes 
of death, like AIDS, homicide, heart disease and cancer, which were 
once considered scourges, now are at record or near-record lows. Indeed, 
when adjusting for the country's aging population, the death rate 
in 1997 was the lowest on record, 478.1 per 100,000 people. The report 
indicated that only 48 more people died last year than in 1996. One 
result of the startling decline is that AIDS went from the eighth 
leading cause of death in the United States in 1996 to the 14th in 
1997. Once the leading cause of death of people 25 to 44 years old, 
the disease is now the fifth leading cause of death for that age group. 
Other highlights of the report include: _ Infant mortality fell to 
7.1 deaths per 1,000 live births, a record low, from 7.3 the previous 
year. _ Life expectancy for those born in 1997 rose to 76.6 years, 
the highest ever recorded. _ A 7 percent decline in death rates for 
black males, mainly the result of the continuing drop since 1993 in 
the overall homicide rate. _ Declines of 3 percent in the death rate 
for heart disease and of 2 percent in the death rate from cancer. 
But it was the sharp drop in the death-rate from AIDS that surprised 
researchers the most. ``We expected there to be a decline, but we 
didn't expect it to be quite so big,'' said Robert Anderson, a statistician 
at National Center for Health Statistics and the author of the mortality 
section of the report. ``We expected to see something on the order 
of 29 or 30 percent. We're talking about 15,000 fewer deaths than 
the year before. In terms of the human equation, that's a big deal.'' 
Researchers and other experts credit the increased use of newer combinations 
of drugs, including those known as protease inhibitors, with preventing 
people who are infected with HIV from developing full-blown AIDS and 
with keeping those who have the disease from succumbing to opportunistic 
infection that in the past easily and painfully killed them. These 
new drugs have now been widely available for about three years, and 
some experts say the country is beginning to see the fruits of these 
new therapies. ``We now have the ammunition and already made a major 
positive impact on HIV-infected individuals when it comes to longevity 
and quality of life,'' said Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director of the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. But even as 
researchers and AIDS advocacy groups rejoiced over the hefty declines 
in AIDS deaths, many expressed concern that apparently the rate of 
people becoming infected by the virus that causes AIDS has not gone 
down. Some researchers and advocates say this indicates that while 
great strides have been made in treating the disease and, therefore, 
forestalling deaths, efforts aimed at preventing the spread of the 
disease have not borne fruit. That, some epidemiologists say, presents 
a new set of worries. A much larger number of people who are infected 
with the AIDS virus are now living longer, and, therefore, have a 
much greater chance of infecting others. ``We have people who, in 
the past, might have been very ill, in bed, not able to be sexually 
active who now are much more active and potentially could continue 
to pass on HIV,'' said Dr. Helene Gayle, director of the National 
Center for HIV, Sexually Transmitted Diseases and and Tuberculous 
Prevention. ``We don't yet know if people on these therapies are less 
infectious or not.'' Already, some researchers say there are signs 
that complacency is seeping into the population of people who are 
most susceptible to HIV infection. Researchers report an upsurge in 
unsafe sexual practices among gay men, and, they say it remains difficult 
to carry out effective prevention programs among intravenous drug 
users. ``This is great news,'' Dr. Gerry McQuillan, senior infectious 
disease epidemiologist at the National Center for Health Statistics 
said of the drop in AIDS death. ``But, I have a 23-year-old son, and 
I'm periodically shocked when he says things, like, `It's not a problem 
anymore, right Mom?''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>