<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0382 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton said on Wednesday that House members should ``cast 
a vote of principle and conscience'' on an impeachment inquiry Thursday, 
as Democratic leaders polished an alternative proposal designed to 
draw as many party members as possible away from the Republican plan 
to authorize a broader investigation. Clinton's remarks gave House 
Democrats facing tough re-election fights room to set their own course 
as the House votes to begin only the third impeachment inquiry into 
a president's actions. He spoke as some Democrats openly complained 
that they were tired of White House pressure to short-circuit an inquiry. 
Stopping short of some Democrats' hopes that he would tell them to 
vote alongside Republicans and put the burden on them to be fair, 
Clinton told reporters, ``It's up to others to decide what happens 
to me and ultimately it's going to be up to the American people to 
make a clear statement there.'' First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton 
and other aides, however, did keep up an effort to convince the undecided 
to vote for their party's proposal. With the House under the control 
of a Republican majority, it is certain to vote against the Democrats' 
call for a limited inquiry into Clinton's deceptions of his relationship 
with Monica Lewinsky. It will then move to pass the Republicans' broader 
impeachment resolution, modeled on the one used to begin the Watergate 
inquiry a quarter of a century ago, calling for Clinton to be investigated 
``fully and completely.'' On the eve of the vote, a letter sent to 
the Judiciary Committee by Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, 
only bolstered the Republicans' drive for an open-ended inquiry. Responding 
to a query last week from the committee, Starr said that he ``cannot 
foreclose the possibility of providing the House of Representatives'' 
with additional findings of possible impeachable offenses. Starr would 
only say that some matters remained under active investigation, although 
he made clear in his referral to Congress that a sexual harassment 
accusation by Kathleen Willey, a former White House volunteer, remained 
unresolved. Clinton has denied under oath any misconduct with Ms. 
Willey. The phrasing of the Republicans' resolution leaves open the 
door for the inquiry to move in any direction. With several dozen 
agonized Democrats still uncertain how they will vote, Democratic 
House leaders went from meeting to meeting on Wednesday looking for 
a way to preserve a semblance of party unity and to prevent many of 
their members from joining the Republicans on the crucial vote. After 
an impassioned and divided two-hour closed Democratic caucus, House 
Democratic leaders revised their own inquiry proposal, bringing it 
ever closer to the Republican version. The new Democratic plan calls 
for an investigation to end on Dec. 31. It also leaves open the possibility 
that any inquiry could move beyond Clinton's relationship with Ms. 
Lewinsky should Starr present more evidence of impeachable offenses 
on other issues. ``You've got a Republican proposal,'' said Rep. Dick 
Gephardt, the House minority leader. ``You've got a Democratic proposal. 
Both of them launch an inquiry. The question is how we're going to 
do this. And a lot of our members feel very strongly that this should 
be done right. This is a high moment for the House of Representatives.'' 
Democratic leaders seemed resigned that they would lose anywhere from 
two dozen to 60 party members on Thursday's vote. These Democrats 
are expected to first vote for the Democratic plan, and when that 
fails vote for the Republican plan. But beyond counting votes and 
reshaping their alternative, the leadership was not pressuring House 
Democrats on how to vote. Rep. Gary Ackerman, D-N.Y., said his party's 
leaders were most concerned about minimizing losses in the looming 
mid-term election and ``don't want to drown anyone'' by trying to 
force party unity. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>