<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0115 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In June 1982, the IBM personal computer, only a few months on the 
market, offered a maximum of 256 kilobytes of memory, a choice of 
one or two floppy disk drives and an optional color monitor. Fully 
configured, it cost close to $7,000. Most buyers took the standard 
features _ a single floppy, a green-and-white monitor and 64 kilobytes 
of memory _ which kept the price under $4,000. A hard drive was not 
an option, but the entire operating system, which IBM had purchased 
from a 32-person company called Microsoft, fit easily on one 128-K 
floppy disk with room to spare. That PC was not a technological marvel 
even by the standards of its day, but it carried the three-letter 
monogram of the International Business Machines Corp., which elevated 
the perception of the personal computer to the level of a serious 
business tool in board rooms around the world. While the corporate 
world focused on the IBM PC, another market for the computer was being 
built around sales to a growing number of consumers who wanted computers 
in their homes for work and play. That trend was reflected in a new 
column called Personal Computing, which made its debut in Science 
Times on June 22, 1982. Aimed not at business users of the new IBM 
but at what it described as the ``home computer market,'' the column's 
first headline offered, ``How Much Memory to Buy.'' ``The memory range 
available in the home computer market now goes all the way from 8 
to 128K,'' the columnist, Erik Sandberg-Diment, wrote. The computers 
from which to choose in this range, he said, were ``the Apple II+ 
(selling for under $2,000), the Commodore 64 ($595), Radio Shack's 
TRS-80, Model II ($5,048) or the Osborne ($1,795).'' One measure of 
how much about personal computers has changed in the last 16 years 
is the fact that of the computer manufacturers represented in his 
list, only Apple is still an industry leader. But as Sandberg-Diment 
wrote his first column, the seeds of far more significant changes 
had been sown that would eventually blur the line between business 
and home computers, making the PC truly personal. Among the most important 
developments were these: _ In Texas, the concept for a computer that 
used the same hardware and operating system as the IBM personal computer 
_ but that would sell for about half the price _ was sketched on a 
paper napkin as three Texas Instruments engineers had lunch. That 
sketch was realized in the first IBM ``clone,'' a computer that looked 
like a portable sewing machine and went by the name Compaq but ran 
any program made for the IBM. The Compaq eventually surpassed IBM's 
share of the market and became the world's largest manufacturer of 
personal computers. _ In California, Steven Jobs, chief executive 
of Apple Computer, was rushing to adopt two revolutionary concepts 
he had come across in a recent visit to the Xerox Corp.'s Palo Alto 
Research Center _ a pointing device called a mouse and an operating 
system built around a ``graphical user interface.'' Both technologies 
became the foundation of a new relationship between people and machines 
with the introduction of the Macintosh, in January 1984. _ In Washington 
State, William Gates and Paul Allen, owners of the company that one 
year earlier had licensed a second-hand operating system to IBM, were 
planning new features for MS-DOS and new programs to run on it. Their 
efforts eventually gave Microsoft _ and, significantly, not IBM _ 
the power to dictate the direction of the world's fastest-growing 
industry. _ Throughout the United States, a decentralized network 
designed to enable academic and military researchers to share ideas 
and text was rapidly connecting more and more campuses and laboratories. 
It used the technology that evolved into the Internet and transformed 
the personal computer into a window on a vast new frontier, cyberspace. 
Yet, despite all that was about to change about the personal computer, 
Sandberg-Diment's first column offered consumers a couple of remarkably 
prescient observations that are as valid today as they were in the 
summer of '82. ``Understanding the concepts involved,'' he wrote of 
the personal computer, ``should be among the very first chores anyone 
attempting to buy one masters. But it isn't easy, and it requires 
a certain amount of concentration and a willingness to forgive jargon.'' 
A few paragraphs later, he noted that ``once you get started you will 
always yearn for as much memory as you can possibly have, and there 
will always be models with more memory than you've got because bigger 
and more sophisticated programs requiring ever larger quantities of 
memory are always on the way.'' Indeed, buying a computer is still 
a process of trying to understand the value of imponderables like 
DVD, PCI, USB and a 100 megahertz bus. Once we have sifted through 
all the jargon, the bottom line is that Windows 98 will not run properly 
with less than 32 megabytes of memory, and any serious user will install 
twice that much _ or 500 times the memory of the most powerful machines 
described in that first Personal Computers column. And, yes, users 
could still use just a little more. After all, the machines people 
buy today can handle up to 384 megabytes of memory, which is 1,500 
times the maximum of the original IBM personal computer. The current 
standard size of the hard drive on a new computer is about 6 gigabytes, 
almost 47,000 times the size of its original floppy drive. Yet, in 
some ways, what has changed most about the personal computer is the 
number of people who use one. In 1982, computers had found their way 
into fewer than 2 percent of all households in the United States. 
Today, more than 40 percent of all homes have at least one computer, 
and by some estimates two or more computers are at work in almost 
12 percent of households. And those are just the machines that we 
think of as computers _ contraptions that have display screens and 
keyboards and disk drives and modems. In truth, the computer is invisibly 
ubiquitous; its processing power controls hundreds of gadgets in our 
lives, from our cars to our telephones and stereos. In fact, as dozens 
of new computer-powered devices are unveiled, it is becoming almost 
impossible to distinguish what is a computer from what is not. NYT-10-05-98 
1715EDT 
</TEXT>
</DOC>