<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0479 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ted Hendry, the plate umpire, interpreted the strike zone consistently, 
which is exactly what players say they prefer. But Hendry's strike 
zone, as always, was larger than most, perhaps a couple of inches 
beyond the black border on either side of the plate, perhaps an inch 
lower than most strike zones. These parameters changed the way Wednesday's 
Yankees-Indians game was played, both benefiting and hurting both 
sides. David Cone usually relies on his slider, and yet in the early 
innings, he could not maintain his mechanics, his front shoulder flying 
open, and he could not control the pitch, leaving him vulnerable; 
Cone needs his slider to keep opposing batters from locking in on 
his fastball. He kept falling behind in the count, against six of 
the first 11 batters he faced. But Cone and his catcher, Joe Girardi, 
recognized quickly that Hendry was particularly generous calling inside 
strikes on left-handed batters, and through the middle innings, Cone 
would keep firing fastballs at that one spot whenever he needed a 
big pitch. Cone threw a staggering 32 pitches in the fourth inning, 
but allowed just one run, on a home run by David Justice. Two of the 
three outs in the inning were on called third strikes, on inside fastballs 
to left-handed batters Omar Vizquel and Jim Thome. Hendry's strike 
zone bought Cone time to find his stuff. Hendry's strike zone, too, 
foiled the strategy of the Yankees' hitters, to take pitches and work 
Cleveland's Charles Nagy deep into ball-strike counts. Twelve of the 
first 13 Yankee batters took the first pitch, to little effect; the 
wider strike zone put them on the defensive thereafter, and Nagy needed 
only 66 pitches to get through the first six innings. The Yankees 
had only three hits and _ horrors _ they trailed, 1-0, in the seventh, 
the first time in the entire post-season another team held a lead 
against them. Bernie Williams opened the seventh inning with a single, 
however, and Tino Martinez drew a four-pitch walk. Yankee fans, dormant 
since the early innings, roared in anticipation. The rally appeared 
to crumble when Tim Raines tried unsuccessfully to drop a sacrifice 
bunt _ something he had never attempted in the regular season _ and 
then struck out. Shane Spencer then smashed a long drive to deep center. 
Perhaps on a warmer day in July or August, the ball would have carried 
over the wall and Spencer would have been responsible for a jubilant 
riot in the Bronx. The chilled air helped prevent the drive from departing, 
however, Kenny Lofton catching it near the wall for the second out; 
Williams tagged up and moved to third. But Scott Brosius, who led 
the American League with a .374 average with runners in scoring position 
this year, pulled a high off-speed pitch into the left-field corner, 
driving home Williams with the tying run. Nagy was removed, disconsolate 
as he slumped off the mound. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>