<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0467 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last spring, Speaker Newt Gingrich and other Republican leaders in 
the House promised representatives from the Christian Coalition that 
Congress would end what the conservatives call partial-birth abortion, 
eliminate financing for the National Endowment for the Arts and work 
for a constitutional amendment to permit prayer in public schools. 
So much for promises. Not one of the measures was adopted. Neither 
was much else of consequence this year in one of the least productive 
sessions of Congress in memory. For the first time since formal congressional 
budget procedures were established in 1974, Congress did not even 
adopt a budget for the current fiscal year. The big tax cut, including 
tax relief for married couples, which Republicans once hoped would 
be the cornerstone of their fall election campaigns, fell by the wayside. 
So did fast-track trade legislation, vouchers for children to attend 
private schools, and almost all the other main items on the Republican 
agenda at the beginning of the year. Legislation to overhaul the IRS 
and expand the rights of taxpayers was enacted, probably the most 
important new law of the year. Congress made progress Wednesday on 
a bill to tighten bankruptcy rules, and several other modest measures 
could make it through the mill in the rush to recess. But a seismic 
Republican idea _ a bill to abolish the income tax altogether at the 
end of 2002 to force enactment of a new method of taxation _ died 
in the Senate. Democrats did not fare any better. Their big-ticket 
items like an increase in the minimum wage and a return to the old 
system of federal subsidies for farmers never got off the ground. 
The most ambitious measures of the year _ tobacco regulation, restrictions 
on managed-care health plans and changes in the campaign finance laws 
_ began as Democratic initiatives but gained a fair amount of bipartisan 
support. No matter. They went nowhere. So what happened? Normally 
the second session of each Congress is quite active. It is an election 
year when lawmakers are usually eager to put their stamp on legislation. 
Why was 1998 such a bust on Capitol Hill? The main answer seems to 
be that the public likes it this way. The latest New York Times/CBS 
News Poll showed that the proportion of people who approve of the 
way Congress is handling its job fell somewhat last month after the 
House Judiciary Committee published the impeachment report of Independent 
Counsel Kenneth Starr. But Congress' approval rating was still around 
50 percent, where it has hovered all year _ the highest percentage 
in a quarter of a century. Contrast this with last year. In 1997, 
Congress approved the first balanced budget since the 1960s, the first 
tax cut since 1981 and vast changes to shore up the Medicare system. 
It also passed _ no small feat _ all 13 spending bills to finance 
government departments and agencies. At the end of the year, only 
33 percent of the people said they approved of the way Congress was 
working. The same low percentage approved of Congress at the end of 
1996, an enormously productive legislative year given that Congress 
and the White House were controlled by different parties. This was 
the year of welfare reform, several new environmental laws, a rewriting 
of all agriculture support programs, an increase in the minimum wage, 
new rules for the telecommunications industry and a bill guaranteeing 
that workers could keep their medical insurance when they changed 
jobs. Of course, there are other reasons for the congressional inertia: 
_ President Clinton was so disabled by scandal that he had no strength 
left to wrestle with Congress over legislation that was especially 
important to him. _ The Republican leadership in the Senate used the 
filibuster, a tool normally reserved to protect the rights of the 
minority, to block campaign finance and tobacco legislation. _ The 
difference in philosophy between Republicans in the House, dominated 
by social conservatives, and those in the Senate, whose strongest 
alliance is with business interests, became so wide that accommodation, 
beyond renaming Washington National Airport after Ronald Reagan, was 
often impossible. _ The productive sessions in 1996 and 1997, in the 
words of L. Ari Fleischer, spokesman for the House Ways and Means 
Committee, ``used up all the oxygen in the room,'' leaving little 
for this year that Congress and the president could agree on. But 
in the final analysis, Democrats and Republicans seemed more interested 
in campaign issues than in legislation. Democrats are basing their 
campaign this year on the theme of the ``do-nothing Republican Congress,'' 
hoping against hope that this will compete in voters' minds with the 
scandal in the White House. Republicans concede that they have been 
warned by their pollsters and consultants they play to Democrats' 
strength when they concentrate on issues like prayer in schools and 
restrictions on abortions and emphasize tax cuts over Social Security. 
Those issues may play well in conservative states and districts that 
Republicans can win anyway. But they could cause the party to lose 
the swing votes they need if they are to gain seats in the November 
election. ``We know we will be back next year with an even larger 
majority in both the House and the Senate,'' House Majority Leader 
Dick Armey told reporters this week. ``And those things that perhaps 
we don't get done this year, we can get done next year.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>