<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0429 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton decided Wednesday that the United States would vote 
to give NATO's supreme commander the authority to carry out military 
strikes against Yugoslav military and police forces in response to 
their crackdown in Kosovo Province. Clinton's decision, disclosed 
after he met with his senior national security advisers, underscored 
the administration's view that only the real threat of air strikes 
will persuade Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to heed international 
demands to end his attacks on ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Before NATO 
can act, all of its 16 members must agree on authorizing strikes, 
and some of the allies remain reluctant to clear the way for them, 
even though Secretary of State Madeleine Albright has been urging 
them to do so for several days. A vote by NATO's representatives, 
which was originally set for Wednesday or Thursday, is now not expected 
to take place until Saturday or Sunday at the earliest. Under the 
NATO charter, a vote to authorize force is the last in a series of 
steps needed before the alliance can undertake military action. While 
a formality, Wednesday's decision puts the administration on record 
as advocating attacks in Yugoslavia. The decision is part of the administration's 
intensifying campaign to press Milosevic into a diplomatic solution 
that both avoids military action and prevents a disaster now facing 
some of the estimated 250,000 ethnic Albanians driven from their homes 
during the crackdown. NATO and U.S. officials said Wednesday that 
Milosevic appeared to be meeting at least some of the conditions laid 
out in a U.N. resolution last month, including a withdrawal of military 
and internal security forces. A Pentagon official said the Yugoslav 
armed forces had pulled back more than 50 percent of the armored units 
that had been involved in the fighting, but other officials said Milosevic 
had not yet met all the demands, including giving aid organizations 
free access to Kosovo. ``It's our view that Milosevic is not hearing 
the message,'' the spokesman for the National Security Council, David 
Leavy, said as he disclosed the president's decision to authorize 
the strikes. ``He's not in compliance, and future action might be 
necessary.'' If NATO carries out its threat to strike Yugoslav military 
and police forces, the United States will contribute scores of cruise 
missiles and more than 250 aircraft to the action, including two of 
the Air Force's advanced B-2 ``stealth'' bombers, officials said Wednesday. 
The U.S. contribution forms the bulk of more than 400 aircraft that 
NATO's 16 allies have pledged to use, if military action is needed. 
NATO's supreme commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, has already completed 
plans for a range of strikes, starting with a short, relatively limited 
cruise missile attack followed by a widening series of air raids that 
would hit targets throughout Serbia, the principal part of what is 
left of Yugoslavia. Even with NATO's authorization to act, there would 
still be a window period lasting one to three days before the attacks 
would actually begin, giving Milosevic a last chance to comply. Some 
NATO allies, particularly Germany, France and Italy, have indicated 
that they want to give Russia one more opportunity to support military 
action against the Serbs, who are longtime allies of the Russians. 
But Russia has already vowed to veto any attempt by the NATO allies 
to receive explicit authorization to use force from the U.N. Security 
Council. On Wednesday the United States reversed course and agreed 
to hold another meeting of the so-called contact group, which includes 
Russia, before NATO votes on strikes. Albright will fly to London 
for the meeting on Thursday after consulting in Brussels with NATO 
officials and the American envoy to the Balkans, Richard Holbrooke, 
who is trying to broker an agreement between Milosevic and Kosovo's 
leaders. State Department's spokesman James Rubin, who is traveling 
with Albright, acknowledged that there is no consensus for military 
action against the Serbs. ``We are continuing to push for early action,'' 
he said. ``NATO is not there yet.'' After meeting with Hungarian Prime 
Minister Viktor Orban, President Clinton said it was ``absolutely 
imperative'' that Milosevic comply. He also said he hoped the Russians 
would go along. ``The most important thing we can do,'' he added, 
``is to try to work with the Russians to try to actually avoid military 
strikes by securing compliance.'' He said NATO cannot let ``tens of 
thousands of people starve or freeze to death this winter because 
Mr. Milosevic didn't keep his word to the Russians and the world community 
one more time.'' In addition to the B-2's, the Pentagon has pledged 
a dozen F-117 stealth strike fighters and half a dozen of the large, 
powerful B-52's, as well as F-15 and F-16 fighters based in Europe, 
the officials said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>