<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981007.0451 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Stephen Calloway opened the front door of his seedy Georgian 
terrace house in the Camberwell section of south London not long ago, 
it was easy to imagine one was being greeted by the original owner. 
Wearing a Vandyke beard with twirled, waxed mustache and a dashingly 
cut 19th-century-style suit that would have made the foppish Benjamin 
Disraeli swoon, Calloway, 47, an art historian and design consultant, 
smiled apologetically at the imposing but ramshackle structure into 
which he had moved a few months earlier. ``Somewhere under all the 
horrors are two 1790s houses struggling to get out,'' he said. In 
the grand tradition of English eccentrics, Calloway has made his passion 
for the past into a way of life so convincingly anachronistic that 
an afternoon spent with him discussing his most recent project seems 
like a step back into the vanished world he has been obsessed with 
since he was a child. An associate curator of drawings and prints 
at the Victoria and Albert Museum, he organized the Aubrey Beardsley 
retrospective that opened there Thursday, to mark the centenary of 
the artist's death. The exhibition of more than 200 works, most drawn 
from the museum's extensive Beardsley holdings, remains on view through 
Jan. 10. In a ground-floor sitting room of the adjacent houses he 
was connecting and renovating with his wife, the decorative artist 
and ceramist Oriel Harwood (from whom he recently separated after 
12 years of marriage), Calloway sank into a velvet Knole sofa and 
spoke of the continuing influence of the subject of his show. ``People 
reinvent Beardsley to fit their own ideas,'' he said. ``Thirty years 
ago his work all seemed decadent and androgynous. It somehow struck 
a chord with the whole explosion of 60s graphics. Now he's being looked 
at more as a protomodernist, and the idea that he's a very radical 
artist is somehow appealing again.'' For many of Calloway's generation, 
Beardsley remains inextricably linked with memories of dorm rooms 
reeking of incense and hung with black-and-white posters of the artist's 
Salome, Ali Baba and other icons of the 60s Art Nouveau revival. But 
younger viewers, Calloway feels, will be able to find much that is 
relevant to them in the work of that tragic but hugely prolific figure, 
who died of tuberculosis at 25. The intensity with which 1990s artists 
have focused on the body, sexuality, gender and personal identity 
gives Beardsley a new topicality, quite different from 60s nostalgia 
for the linear languor of Art Nouveau as seen through the distorting 
lens of polymorphous-perverse psychedelia. ``Beardsley was one of 
the first artists to confront sexuality head on,'' Calloway maintained. 
``The closest recent parallel, I suppose, is Robert Mapplethorpe, 
in the way he uses absolutely explicit imagery in a rather cool manner. 
They're both masters of black and white and share a similar temperament, 
that dispassionate way of producing things which are actually extremely 
outrageous. And the fact that they both died young has a curious new 
resonance as a result of AIDS and the linking of sex and death. Nobody 
ever appeared to die of sex in the 1960s, when it was the main aim 
of life.'' Sometimes, as Calloway pointed out, Beardsley could be 
naughtily subversive, as when his publisher asked him to redo a drawing 
of John Bull to make it ``more robust.'' In his revised version, the 
artist appended a tiny but unmistakable erection beneath the patriotic 
figure's breeches, a detail that escaped notice until after the reproduction 
was distributed. On other occasions, his work was frankly pornographic. 
His notorious series of illustrations for Aristophanes' ``Lysistrata'' 
and the ``Satires'' of Juvenal, in which enormous phalluses, masturbation, 
flagellation and flagrant sexual posturing of all sorts are portrayed, 
still have the power to startle. Those long-forbidden works aroused 
particular anxiety in publicly puritanical Japan, where the Victoria 
and Albert exhibition traveled to four cities earlier this year. ``The 
Japanese see their own art reflected in Beardsley,'' Calloway explained 
of his subject, whose Japanomania was widely shared in the British 
art world during the Esthetic Movement. ``But they like his macabre 
subject matter as well, and the graphic clarity of it. The way I structured 
the exhibition was to put most of the obscene drawings in one group, 
because historically it's where they belong. That section is titled 
``All Obscene Drawings,'' from the last letter Beardsley wrote on 
his deathbed, which should be enough of a warning. Funnily enough, 
the one piece the Japanese refused to show was an erotic shunga print 
by Utamaro, which Beardsley is known to have owned. Perhaps they saw 
their own sexuality a little too clearly in it.'' Beardsley's transgressive 
tendencies can be found even in his seemingly innocuous works. In 
a new book that accompanies the exhibition, published by Abrams, Calloway 
offers illuminating interpretations of Beardsley's drawings and digs 
beneath their deceptively facile surfaces. ``I was very keen to see 
if one could get out as much as I was convinced Beardsley put into 
his images,'' the author said. ``I've always felt that they're absolutely 
laden with very precise detail which was telling to an audience of 
his date. In certain instances it's very obvious what he's up to, 
but sometimes he's quite coded. The more you can bring to it in terms 
of period knowledge, the more you can squeeze out of it.'' For example, 
in discussing the artist's 1894 prospectus for ``The Yellow Book,'' 
the fin-de-siecle arts journal, Calloway ponders why its depiction 
of a stylishly dressed young woman browsing outside a bookshop at 
night could stir a Victorian frisson. ``Elegant and assertive,'' he 
writes of the fashionable bibliophile, ``she proclaims her, at best, 
dubious social position by the mere fact of her nocturnal shopping 
expedition, alone and unchaperoned in the street. As an image of English 
womanhood, it was almost guaranteed to shock.'' Calloway, the son 
of an architect, was born in London, where he studied art history 
at University College and the Courtauld Institute. ``I used to go 
to the V. and A. by myself from the time I was 10 and always wanted 
to be a part of that,'' he said, recalling Bryan Reade's landmark 
1966 Beardsley retrospective at the museum as a revelation. ``I just 
naturally gravitated there, working during school holidays and eventually 
joining the drawings and prints department in 1976.'' A big break 
came when the museum's iconoclastic director, Sir Roy Strong, asked 
Calloway to become his assistant, a job the young man held for five 
years. The two slightly built, long-haired men bear a striking resemblance, 
and both cultivate an over-the-top dandyism, though Sir Roy's bears 
a swinging 60s stamp and his former aide's is more purely antiquarian. 
Because many of Calloway's vintage outfits are now too fragile and 
valuable for everyday wear, he has them copied by a theatrical costumer. 
``I bought my first pair of spats in Portobello Road about 1966,'' 
he remembers. Soon his wardrobe became a veritable encyclopedia of 
19th-century male fashion. Calloway's familiarity with period modes 
of dress and deportment has made him a sought-after historical consultant 
for recent films like ``Emma,'' ``Oscar and Lucinda'' and ``The Portrait 
of a Lady.'' ``Strangely, I seem to have become an expert on 19th-century 
manners, how people should shake hands and eat at table,'' he said. 
``It still comes as a bit of a shock when the credits roll to see 
oneself listed as `etiquette adviser.' '' Because of his movie work 
and other demands on his time _ writing books and magazine articles, 
lecturing and undertaking design commissions like the redecoration 
of London's Marlborough House for English Heritage _ Calloway now 
spends only one day a week at the Victoria and Albert. ``My activities 
there are basically esthetic,'' he said, ``choosing colors for the 
walls, hanging pictures and things like that, which as far as I'm 
concerned is the fun part of it. It's the unbelievable luxury of thinking 
how you're going to arrange things.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>