<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981007.2000.1260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The days of yo-ho-ho and a bottle of rum are long gone, but pirates 
are still terrorizing the high seas. In fact, the attacks are becoming 
more violent and more frequent. The International Maritime Organization, 
a U.N. agency, will hold a series of work shops later this month to 
teach port authorities, harbor police and ship owners about the dangers 
of piracy. THE WORLD's Alan Dow prepared this report. Forget the peg 
leg and Salty, the parrrot. Today's pirates aren't the rowdy swashbucklers 
portrayed in old Hollywood films. Today's black beard is a sea-faring 
terrorist. According to Eric Ellen from the London based International 
Maritime Bureau. Can you imagine a gun being put in your mouth and 
you've been threatened with having your head blown off or your ears 
cut off with cutlasses? I mean, these things happen. I've known ship's 
captains to be tied to the mast. Last year, the International Maritime 
Organization recorded more than 250 cases of piracy, twice as many 
as five years ago. And some experts say many attacks go unreported. 
While there's never been a substantiated report of piracy in U.S. 
territorial waters, American citizens and ships are at risk. Commercial 
vessels and pleasure crafts are targets mostly in waters around Southeast 
Asia, but even the Caribbean and Mediterranean Seas aren't safe according 
to the International Maritime Bureau's deputy director Putengall Mackunda. 
There have been leisure boats which have been - yachts which have 
been attacked off the coast of Greece, very close to Albania, and 
there have been a few people who have been murdered in these attacks. 
The type of attack differs depending on the target. Many pirates storm 
aboard a freighter from the back of the ship as it slows to approach 
port. Sometimes they sneak on board at night when the ship is anchored 
in the harbor. Today's pirates don't swing on board from a rope tied 
to the main mast, but historian David Cordingly says they have the 
same objectives as those who flew the skull and cross bones. They 
look different, obviously, and they're armed with machine guns. But 
the principle of pirate attacks today is very similar to how it used 
to be in the Caribbean and the great age of piracy, and this is the 
sort of hit and run attack when they sneak out from the islands. In 
this case, we're talking about Indonesian islands, but it was the 
same in the West Indies, and intercept ships as they come slowly through 
towards their final port. So in that sense, they're exactly the same, 
and they're also the same in the sense that they get their way by 
means of the threat of violence. In the old days, it used to be a 
shot across the bows and lots of shouting and landing on board with 
cutlasses. And today, it's obviously machine guns and things like 
that. The International Maritime Bureau says the United Nations isn't 
taking the problem of piracy seriously enough. The IMB's Eric Ellen 
says with the attacks increasing, it's time to take action. Two-hundred-and-fifty 
attacks per year perhaps is not terribly significant, but I think 
that unless and until someone like the United Nations takes a stand 
on this, we're going to continue to have these attacks. But the United 
Nations says it is treating these attacks seriously. It's worldwide 
shipping concern, the International Maritime Organization, is launching 
a series of seminars to teach ship owners and port authorities how 
to defend against piracy. The policy is not to arm seafarers because 
that only invites greater retaliation from the pirates. The IMO's 
Roger Cohen preaches restraint. The problems are compounded when you 
start using weapons, guns, knives, and so on. You can get people being 
killed or injured, and there have been a number of deaths resulting 
from these instances. So the whole thing could become much more ugly 
and that is why IMO has been sending out missions and try and organize 
seminars and organize some sort of counter measures because we would 
like it to stop before it gets any worse. The IMO says there are simple 
things a ship owner can do to avoid attacks in the first place like 
flood lighting the back of the ship and posting crew members to keep 
watch on each side of the vessel. A satellite distress signal is also 
a good idea. The bottom line the experts say is as with any violent 
crime, don't resist. For THE WORLD, I'm Alan Dow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>