<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981007.2000.0655 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although his government has been preoccupied for months with Russia's 
economic troubles, President Yeltsin has been concentrating on international 
issues, especially the crisis in the Serbian province of Kosovo. Yeltsin 
has been trying to prevent NATO air strikes against Serbia. Mike McFall, 
a professor of political science at Stanford University says the Russian 
president's foreign policy, at least in this case, is ruled by domestic 
politics. Ties between Serbia and Russia go back long before Yeltsin, 
and it's a recognized political fact in Russia that you cannot be 
subservient to the West when it comes to Serbia. I think that's a 
tragic situation but that's the domestic politics of Russia today. 
And it's especially Couldn't Russia, on the other hand, be putting 
some pressure on Serbia then since it does seem to enjoy particularly 
a close relationship with them? Again, it's important to realize that 
because Yeltsin is weak, he can't demonstrate that kind of leadership. 
I think if he was in a much stronger position, you might see that 
kind of pressure. But because he's weak, he just goes with this kind 
of standard line, "We have to defend our Serbian brothers." So they 
see it very different than we do, by the way. They don't see Milosevic 
as the bad guy, as the one causing the trouble there. They see it 
quite the opposite. What about Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov? He 
is a hard liner, at least he has been in the past. Is he perhaps the 
one who's really calling the foreign policy and not Yeltsin? Yes and 
no. He reflects the political interest of the Duma and of Nationalists 
and Communists forces in Russia today. And in the old days, we could 
rely on Yeltsin, we could give him a call and say, "Hey, you know, 
settle these guys down." Yeltsin's not in a position to do that today, 
and so instead, foreign policy is being done by Primakov and really 
by the Parliament. The Parliament for the first time since Russia's 
transition, is playing a central role in both foreign and domestic 
policy. Presuming Western leaders share your insights and your conclusions 
about the relatively ineffectiveness of Russia as a power internationally 
right now, how do you treat it? Well, I think it's important to keep 
engaging Russia and to treat Russia like a European power. I think 
it would be wrong to say this is a basket case, let's just build a 
fire wall around this country and contain the negative things that 
might come out of it. After all, remember, the collapse and the end 
of the Cold War happened not because of the diplomacy and not because 
of state to state relations, but because things changed internally 
within the Soviet Union. It was domestic change that brought about 
this new international situation. Likewise, it will be domestic change 
either for worse or for better within Russia which will get us either 
back into a new Cold War situation or will bring Russia into the international 
community of state. So I think it's important to still remain focused 
on domestic politics in Russia and to not get into this mind set of, 
"Well, we have to get ready for, you know, Cold War number two because 
Russia's already been lost." It's too early to write off Russia right 
now. And if were were to add just a couple of more big guns that Russia 
undeniably does have in its arsenal, would you say that that's also 
its position on the U.N. Security Council, its ability to say no at 
least, veto power and the nuclear arsenal? That's right. And I would 
especially emphasize the nuclear arsenal which after all is why they 
have the seat. And Russia, you know, in some ways, is cursed with 
having nuclear weapons because as a result of having these weapons, 
they can get away with doing stupid things on the economic front, 
I think. But as long as they do have those nuclear weapons, we will 
treat Russia not like the Netherlands and not even like Brazil but 
like a country of central strategic importance to the Western world. 
Mike McFall is professor of political science at Stanford University 
in California and a specialist in Russian affairs. Thanks a lot. Thanks 
for having me. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>