<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981007.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There were predictions that 28 million Russians, a sixth of the country's 
population, would turn out today for protests against unpaid wages 
and a slump in living standards. But a spokesman for Boris Yeltsin, 
a prime target of those demonstrations, estimates that a mere 615,000 
hit the streets. If the protesters weren't that plentiful, the rhetoric 
was. THE WORLD's Alistair Wanklin talked to some of the demonstrators 
in Moscow and sent us this report. Communists and trade union leaders 
had expected millions of Russians to support the demonstrations, but 
in some cities, only a few thousand turned out. Most that did spoke 
of desperation. I'm destitute. I'm 62-years-old. I used to be happy 
in life. I can't understand why now I have to suffer. Protesters gathering 
in the cold sunny air in the Russian capital had one main complaint. 
We haven't received wages for six months. Primakov said payments would 
begin on the 1st of October, but unfortunately, this hasn't happened. 
The Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov had appealed for calm in a nationwide 
television on the address of the protests. Primakov said the government 
would pay debts and provide supplies throughout the winter ahead. 
In today's difficult conditions, the government has worked out a plan 
to insure that Russia gets vegetables and medical supplies, so I appeal 
to everyone not to rock our common boat. This is just the latest occasion 
in Russia's recent history that people have spilled onto the streets. 
A demonstration this time last year drew about two million people. 
Now, however, conditions are very much worse. The ruble has lost 60 
percent of its value in the past few weeks. Russians' incomes have 
been cashed in real terms as a result to 1992 levels. Social analyst, 
Vladimir Olov of the Center for Policy Studies I Moscow says Russians 
are a quiet people, and when they take to the streets, they're at 
breaking point. The Russians historically are against protests, and 
they really wait as long as they can or even a little bit longer. 
The Russian leadership, however, is traditionally cautious about public 
descent. Days before today's scheduled protests, the government announced 
that it had paid all wages owed to the armed forces. And on Tuesday, 
President Boris Yeltsin expanded the powers of senior police officers. 
But that wasn't enough to stop the protesters today calling for Boris 
Yeltsin to step down. Liberal politician Galena Startavoitova says 
the demonstrations were unlikely to topple those in power. I don't 
think they can topple down the government, but it is a real threat 
to the current establishment, not only to the government but to the 
president as well. And, of course, the government will be forced to 
take into account the demands of these protesters. But on the other 
hand, the Communist Party is trying to exploit these protests. The 
Communists were not alone in trying to capitalize on the protests. 
In the Siberan region of Krastanosk, the governor and possible presidential 
candidate Alexander Lierbert spurred two demonstrators and supported 
calls for Yeltsin to resign. There was similar sentiment in the city 
of Sumara where nationalist lawmaker Albert Makashev called for legal 
action against monetarist reformers. We will take all the reformers 
and those responsible for Perastroika to court and then flog them 
in the middle of Red Square. But protesters differed in what they 
wanted, including some who said no return to the past. No, I don't 
want to go back to the past, but I don't want this life either for 
me or my children. I want something totally different, something worthy 
of human life. I definitely don't want what used to be. The Communists 
say they don't want to turn the clocks back. They promise a different 
Russia. Party leader Ganadys Yuganov has even described himself as 
middle class and an advocate of social democracy. And now that the 
Communists have their men in government, they have a chance to deliver 
on their promises. As protesters headed home tonight, it was reported 
that Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov had given his Communist deputy 
responsibility for government economic policy. The Communists may 
be calling for change, but they also now call the shots. Analysts 
are divided over whether such a style of split government can work, 
but they agree that Russians have survived a lot already and they'll 
continue to get by without a new revolution. For THE WORLD, I'm Alistair 
Wanklin in Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>