<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981007.2000.2883 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Still to come, Nomad soul from Senegal on PRI. Right now, you're tuned 
to THE WORLD on 91 FM. After this program at, it's TALK OF THE NATION 
with Ray Soares. Ray and his guests take a look at the humanitarian 
crisis in Kosovo and whether Americans will be part of a possible 
NATO air strike against Yugoslavia. Then at 10:00 is THIS AMERICAN 
LIFE with Ira Glass. Tonight's show is about germs. And at 11:00, 
join Charlie Rose with a panel discussion on Northern Ireland. That's 
what's coming up. Hope you'll stay with us. You're listening to 91 
FM. This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. Spice is the variety of life 
and it's also the key to today's geography quiz. Remember we were 
looking for a region with the largest population of Mexican Indians, 
the site of some Mexico's highest temples and spiciest cuisines. The 
state and its capital share the same name. It's Oaxaca. That's O-a-x-a-c-a. 
And for a taste of the chiles that Oaxaca is famous for, we called 
up Ileana de La Vega, the owner and chef of the Narajo restaurant 
in downtown Oaxaca. One of the most important chiles here is the chile 
Riagua, which is a very pale green chile, small, and very picante 
or hot. Chile Riagua means a chile of water, right? Water chile, right. 
What kind of business does a chile of water have being so hot? I don't 
know, you know, but it's so flavorful. But I don't know. Maybe it's 
because you need a lot of water to take it to eat it. ah. Maybe, I'm 
not sure about that, about the name, where it comes from. Well, for 
those of us who don't have the same kind of access to all of the different 
chiles that you have there in Oaxaca, could you give us some kind 
of a recipe for a dish that we could make here but would still be 
authentic Oaxacanio ? Yes, of course. What I have at hand is a recipe 
from my grandmother, who was a great cook. And she calls it Poidro 
Mandrado, which is amole almonds. gah. So, OK, we need eight chicken 
pieces, three tablespoons oil, seven pieces of red chile antro, three 
quarters of a cup of blanched almonds, four large tomatoes, two garlic 
cloves, one medium onion, four black peppercorns, two cloves and half 
of a piece of a french roll, and one medium stick of cinnamon, one 
tablespoon sesame seed. Yeah. Salt and sugar to taste, and three cups 
of chicken stock. All right. OK, first, clean the chiles. Roll them 
slightly over the flame. Take the stem and the seeds off and put them 
in hot water for 20 minutes. OK, over a skillet, roast the tomatoes, 
garlic, and onion for about ten minutes. Wash the chicken and in a 
larger skillet, heat three to four tablespoons oil, and in it, fry 
the chicken pieces. When they are ready, put them aside. And in the 
same skillet, fry the almonds and then lightly the sesame seeds. OK, 
in the food processor or blender, process the tomatoes, garlic, onion, 
almonds, bread, sesame, peppercorns, clove, cinnamon, and chile. And 
add enough water until it gets blended. Pour this into a large pot, 
and when the sauce change color, add the chicken stock, salt, sugar, 
and of course, the chicken. Leave it simmering until chicken is completely 
cooked. Serve hot with white rice and hot tortilla. And for those 
who would like to be able to do the recipe and put their own personal 
touch and expression into it, they can reach us via our Web site at 
www.theworld.org and just ask for the recipe for the Oaxaca Almond 
Chicken, right? Yes, perfect. OK, Ileana de La Vega, owner and chef 
of the Narajo restaurant in downtown Oaxaca, muchos gracias. Gracias. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>