<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981007.2000.2027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eight days before President Clinton is to host a summit with Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat and Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, 
Madeleine Albright held one of her own on the Gaza Strip. After meeting 
with the two men, the Secretary 0f State said she had made substantial 
progress towards sealing a peace deal. Arafat confirmed Albright's 
assessment telling reporters she has done a lot to push the peace 
process forward. Netanyahu, however, said only a modest step had been 
achieved. From Jerusalem, THE WORLD's Richard Myron has our story. 
Secretary of State Albright came to the region to bridge the gaps 
between the two sides. The Israelis have sought security issuances 
from the Palestinians while the Palestinians have been looking for 
Israel to withdraw its forces from an additional 13 percent of the 
West Bank and to clear the way for the opening of an airport and an 
industrial zoning Gaza. Today's negotiations began with a three-way 
meeting. Let me shake hands. Benjamin Netanyahu and Yasser Arafat 
seemed uncomfortable as they clasped each other's hands in the full 
glare of publicity. But this apparently forced gesture gave way to 
a sense of rapport between the Iraeli and Palestinian leaders as the 
day wore on. Following the talks, Secretary Albright accompanied them 
to an unscheduled lunch in Gaza. Over lunch, the Secretary of State 
sounded a note of optimism. I would like to toast to this new chapter 
of our diplomacy and the significance it has for progress and success 
at the Washington summit. But Albright tempered her optimism with 
caution. While I am very encouraged by what I would call really a 
neew spirit that was evident here in the talks that we had, there 
clearly are still many decisions to be made, the kinds of decisions 
that can only be made by the leaders themselves. And those are the 
kinds of subjects that will be raised when we're all together at the 
Washington summit. The response of the Iraeli prime minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu was somewhat more mixed. I liken this to climbing the foothills 
and now we see the mountain before us. And Washington will have to 
climb the mountain. As far as final settlement talks, I don't rule 
out the possibility that if the Washington summit succeeds, we'll 
embark right at the close of this agreement on the beginning of final 
settlement talks. But Rashid Kaladi of the Center for International 
Studies at the University of Chicago expressed pessimism that any 
agreement will alter the status of the West Bank. The vast majority, 
over 95 percent of the West Bank is now and will continue to be controlled 
be Israel in military terms, whether such an agreement is reached 
or not. Still, today's negotiations have allowed the peace talks to 
go ahead next week in Washington, and the Clinton administration has 
invested much credibility and effort in getting to this point, and 
it will use its influence now to try and insure that a deal is reached. 
For THE WORLD, this is Richard Myron reporting from Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>