<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981007.2000.3224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Senegalese vocalist Baba Mahal released his Grammy Award winning 
1994 CD, "Fire in Futa,", music fans took notice. Now Baba Mahal has 
a new label and a new album. As THE WORLD's Marco Worman tells us, 
it's Senegalese music with a window wide open on the rest of the globe. 
The first voice you hear on "Nomad Soul" is not Baba Mahal. And as 
Baba Mahal says, that's precisely what sets "Nomad Soul" apart from 
his other recordings. BABA MAHAL, at makes it really different, we 
have a lot of guests who come to experiment as a way to go into African 
to see how it works to get the likes of Sinead O'Connor, involvement 
who sing in a lot of the songs. There are a lot of other guests on 
"Nomad Soul" as well who try their hand stirring up Baba Mahal's delectable 
Senegalese musical stew. But some music critics have wondered if Baba 
Mahal's stew contains too many Western ingredients, and that by featuring 
so many Western artists, he's losing the true power of his music. 
But Baba Mahal defends his songs on "Nomad Soul." The song "Lam Lam" 
that we do then I sing the voice, the melody is African is just. It's 
I can sing the melody over, and I sing them also with. You know nothing 
to chance. Everything is very African. It's like the also or the corder 
player or the drum player. They got just African. But you can feel 
it the two different side and they very distinct in the album and 
they work really well together. What would you say to Senegalese who 
are saying that you've gone too far away from your roots? I would 
say they don't understand the way of life. I think if you look at 
the world even from Senegalese, you see the world like a big door 
open in Senegal which is waiting for all these people to come inside. 
The world now is like a big market. You are in Senegal. You know that 
you are a Senegalese person. You are from Africa. But also, you belong 
to the rest of civilization. And especially for the music because 
now everyone is open to the rest of the world. Everything is mixed, 
even the clothes. And this is our generation. This is the time we 
are living now. We can't say just going to be just African playing 
for African people. You play for African play and the rest of the 
world. "Africans Unite" is a duet Baba Mahal performs with Jamaican 
reggae star Luciano, half recorded in Dakar, the Senegalese capital, 
and half in Kingston. "Africans Unite" shows in words and music exactly 
what Baba Mahal is talking about when he says his music is emigrating 
through that big door in Senegal. For THE WORLD, this is Marco Worman. 
Many kinds of music from Baba Mahal bring this edition of the program 
to a close. In Boston, I'm Tony Kahn. Join us again tomorrow for another 
spin of the world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>