<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981007.2000.2577 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An unsettling example of technology out pacing government can be found 
on the Internet. There, any child with access to the World Wide Web 
can open the door to pornography. Today, the House of Representatives 
is expected to vote on the Child Online Protection Act designed to 
keep kids away from cyber porn. The bill would require commercial 
Web sites to restrict access to material deemed harmful to minors 
by asking for a credit card or other proof of age. Todd Lapen, associate 
editor of "Wired" magazine says the drafters of the bill took advantage 
of a legal precedent. The current legislation adapts a Supreme Court 
decision which originally applied to your phone sex services which 
said that if you require the use of a credit card for commercial service, 
then you basically de facto imposing an age verification system because 
not many minors have credit cards. And that's basically what this 
legislation does. It requires the use of a credit card to verify age. 
Now the problem with this is for most people, pornography sites are 
the very last people they want to give their credit cards to. These 
sites have a terrible reputation for protecting a user's privacy, 
for allowing them to get their credit card number out of these sites, 
databases. It's just a very insecure system. And the current legislation 
doesn't really seem to do much to protect privacy. And basically, 
it seems to be a really bad idea that people should be using their 
credit cards as some sort of age verification system. Well, presumably 
also, there would be access to the material without using your credit 
card anyway, right? This isn't going to stop the dissemination by 
any means of the material. It certainly won't. It will have a chilling 
effect on the dissemination of that material within the United States. 
That's without a doubt. But every Internet surfer knows that really 
international boundaries are invisible when you're using the Internet. 
And they won't do anything to stop any sort of material coming from 
other countries all around the world: Japan, the Netherlands, Germany, 
wherever. But what about just simply holding the people responsible 
for whatever ends up somebody's computer who is the supplier of the 
access to the Internet? In other words, the Internet service providers. 
Is the thinking basically that if you can hold them responsible, then 
they'll have to take care of the problem, police it, however they 
can? That approach hasn't been very popular in the United States, 
and quite frankly, I don't think that it should be. I don't think 
it's a very wise way to go. In the same way we don't really ask our 
telephone companies in the United States to be in the business of 
patrolling what people say. I don't think we should be having Internet 
providers doing the same thing. A lot of these are very small businesses. 
People are literally running them out of their garage. They're just 
not equipped nor would they be able to bear the expense of actually 
monitoring what people do. But on the other hand, that approach has 
caught on in other countries. It's taken place to a certain extent 
in Germany. That's the tact they take where they sort have said, "Look, 
if you're in the Internet business, it's your job to make sure that 
some materials just do not get through." And they've shown themselves 
to be quite serious about it by, for example, charging a senior executive 
with Compuserve in Germany, the Compuserve online service with trafficking 
in banned material. Can you think of any other countries that are 
successful, relatively speaking as Germany has been in wrestling with 
this problem? There are lots of countries that are trying in various 
ways. China has been affected to a certain extent because what they 
have done is basically impose an incredible amount of responsibility 
on individual Internet users, and the fines are quite severe, and 
the kind of registration procedures you have to go through are quite 
serious. So it has the effect of making people understand that they 
are certainly being watched. In Ressa, what's happened is the heirs 
to the KGB, the FSB, the new federal security service has actually 
imposed a lot of surveillance requirements requiring that almost all 
Internet traffic and Web site traffic be logged and cataloged and 
made available to the internal police on demand. Now that idea is 
in the proposal stage right now, but it's had a very chilling effect 
on the Internet and Ressa, because people know that the police are 
listening. Well, very quickly then before we log out on your subject 
all together, Todd, is there a feeling that really the whole world 
itself will have to end up in some way sharing the same ethical system 
the way it seems to be wrestling whether you're sharing the same cultural 
kind of system? Well, that's actually the huge question. It doesn't 
just affect speech regulation. It affects everything from taxation 
to privacy to, you know, just the whole gamut of issues that come 
up when you talk about the concept of Internet governances, the fact 
that the Internet -- All of our systems of government that we rely 
on right now are basically rooted very heavily in concepts of physical 
territory and physical jurisdiction. Obviously the Internet kind of 
makes all of that irrelevant. So the kinds of struggles that we're 
seeing here with speech regulation are only really the beginning. 
Todd Lapen is an associate editor of "Wired" magazine, which covers 
online issues in the world of technology. Thanks, Todd. My pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>