<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981007.2000.0920 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United Nations is reacting cautiously, very cautiously to an unusual 
offer by Afghanistan's Taliban government. The Taliban supreme leader 
says his country will stop growing the poppies that make Afghanistan 
the world's second biggest opium producer in exchange for U.N. recognition. 
Afghanistan's seat at the world body is presently occupied by Burhanuddin 
Rabbani, whom the Taliban ousted two years ago. Since then, as the 
BBC's William Reeve in Kabul tells us the Islamic militia has been 
consolidating control over the southwest Asian nation. What's happened 
is that over the last few months, the Taliban have taken most of the 
north of the country and the center of the country, and they now have 
about 90 percent of Afghanistan all together, and they feel that the 
legitimate government of the country now say they want recognition 
from the world and from the U.N. At the moment, only three countries 
recognize them: Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. 
And they feel it's their due now to be recognized. In offering to 
suspend their production of opium poppies, they are making from an 
economic point of view anyway, a very serious offer, aren't they, 
to the U.N.? Well, it is. At the moment, there are about a million 
people that survive off growing poppies and it's produced into opium, 
not by the farmers The farmers don't get rich. What happens is traders 
come in from Pakistan and various places. They're the ones that make 
the money. So on the one hand, the Taliban don't necessarily lose 
much from it. The actual poor farmers will. It's going to be very 
complicated that if the Taliban actually do stop opium being produced, 
something else will have to come in its place. And so it's a sort 
of two-way process that's going to be very difficult to do straight 
away, although the Taliban say they want to do it immediately. But 
the one thing about the Taliban is that they have imposed for the 
first time in about 20 years of total anarchy in the country, they've 
imposed a form of law and order so if anybody's going to be able to 
do this, it's probably them. Is the U.N. the likely to take this offer 
seriously? Well, the United Nations office for the control of narcotics, 
drugs, the United Nations drug control program has said they're interested 
and they will be looking at it. What the UNDCP has been trying to 
do is offer alternative forms of agriculture or production that the 
farmers won't make as much as they would from opium but they would 
help with things like irrigation and transport and help the communities 
that are at the moment subsisting on the growth of the opium. As we 
know, William, the U.N. has so far withheld recognition of the Taliban, 
not only because of its involvement with opium production but for 
a couple of other reasons: their attitude toward women's rights and 
the fact that they've been harboring Osama bin Laden, who's wanted 
in connection with the bombings in Kenya. I gather the Taliban is 
seriously considering giving the U.N. something of what it wants in 
terms of Osama bin Laden as well. So that would be two carrots out 
of three. Would that be enough to make it carrot stew do you think? 
Well, it's difficult to know about Osama bin laden 'cause we've heard 
a lot of things from newspaper reports in the region that say he's 
about to go to Libya, that say he's about to do this, that say he's 
not even in Afghanistan. It's not in the Taliban's interest at the 
moment to actually have him in the country, but they don't know how 
to solve this particular issue. As the Taliban point out, it's difficult 
to extradite bin Laden because none of the governments, no governments 
around the world actually recognize the Taliban so they don't have 
any extradition treaties with them, which is a sort of carrot on a 
stick argument. But as far as the stand on their policies towards 
women, they show no signs of being weakened at all. William Reeve 
is the BBC's correspondent in Kabul. Thanks very much, William. Tony, 
many thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>