<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981007.2000.2285 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Southern African governments are getting more aggressive in courting 
foreign investment. This week, they took their show on the road to 
Minneapolis. There for the first time, more than a dozen countries 
from the southern part of the continent presented themselves as a 
block to American companies. The message was straightforward: As Minnesota 
public radio's John Raby tells us, "Put your money here." The 14 nations 
of the Southern African development community include most of the 
country's in Africa's southern third, ranging from the tiny island 
nation, the Sayshells, to diamond giant Botswana, to South Africa, 
with the largest economy on the continent. This week, ambassadors 
and ministers from Southern Africa gathered in Minneapolis to meet 
with representatives from more than 80 American companies, firms like 
3M, Honeywell, and Cargill. Mohammed Rafik, Mozambique's deputy commerce 
minister, repeats one of the themes of the trade conference, that 
the Southern African development community known as Sadac, is entering 
a new era of renaissance. There is a vision in Sadac to build a community. 
And this process of building a community now with the right environment, 
peace, stability in the region, and taking account that Africa has 
to come into the playing field. Rafik and the other Sadac representatives 
are trying to dispel the images of war, poverty, and corruption that 
stifle American investment in Africa, and it's not easy with the ongoing 
strife and member nations, Angola, Rasutu, and the Democrat Republic 
of Congo. Mozambique has seen its share of war and famine and remains 
one of the poorest countries in the world, but four years ago, the 
country held its first multi-party elections. And Rafik says now it's 
time to take the next step with foreign investment to help ease his 
country's poverty. Democracy without sustainable development, without 
alleviation of poverty, without reduction of inequalities cannot be 
achieved. If you want to talking about real democracy, we have to 
uplift the quality of life, the education of our people. And through 
investments, through employment, through development, we can achieve 
this. For a country like Mozambique, the Minneapolis conference was 
gold mine, giving of access to merely 100 American businesses all 
willing to consider investing in Southern Africa. Angie Sohol with 
TLC, a high tech spinoff company of Honeywell. There's always a chance 
and risk involved, but I mean, I think the more I learn about Southern 
Africa and the opportunities there, the less the risk is. And do you 
have any particular country in mind right now? I have actually a few. 
Zimbabwe I was looking at, Mozambique... And as luck would have it, 
as Ms. Sohol is reading through her list of potential investment sites, 
who should walk by but Mohammed Rafik from Mozambique. He listens 
for a moment and then asks a very pointed question. Really match and 
upgrade the communications industry that is currently there. What 
now do you want to produce in Mozambique? We want to sell our products. 
invest in Mozambique. ok. And from there, export to other parties. 
ok. You'll be more than welcomed because our investment policy is 
to bring and attract skills, expertise, know how, technology, and 
above all, wisdom. Right. Sohol then indicated her company would consider 
building a factory in Mozambique. But after that, Deputy Commerce 
Minister Rafik waved me away so they could talk privately. But at 
least they were talking, and that's the aim of the conference. New 
money is coming into Mozambique, and that means also new temptations. 
Roger Barry is a Boston-based consultant who helps Fortune 500 companies 
interested in investing in Africa. There are some reports that, you 
know, there's some concerns. But now there's a good government, there's 
good processes, a commitment to privatization. They just need to make 
sure as they go forward that they put in place good anti-corruption 
measures and deal with problems as they arise. And I think they're 
doing that, but you know, the next two years will be a good test case. 
Fighting corruption isn't the only challenge for the Southern African 
countries. Most of them lack a strong entrepreneurial class making 
it difficult for a private sector to develop. There's also competition 
within Sadac. South Africa, the economic giant of the region, continues 
to attract the overwhelming share of foreign investment. For THE WORLD, 
I'm John Raby reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>