<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981004.1830.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. I'm Carole Simpson. The house Judiciary committee is 
expected to vote as early as tomorrow to recommend a formal impeachment 
inquiry tomorrow to into President Clinton's alleged impeachment misdeeds. 
President Clinton's alleged today, former president today, Gerald 
Ford added his voice to the debate. Although he's a republican, it's 
the democrats who are cheering his suggestion. We begin with ABC's 
Mike Von Fremd at the ite house. Mike? Carole, with the prospect of 
impeachment hearings, hanging over Washington, President Clinton's 
advisers today welcomed a proposal from a former republican president 
to spare the country of painful process. In an op-Ed piece titled 
"the path back to dignity" imprinted in this morning's "New York Times," 
85-year-old Gerald Ford who pardoned Richard Nixon, suggests a scenario 
to end this crisis. Ford wants President Clinton to stand in the well 
of the house where he would -- the ranking democrat on the house Judiciary 
committee says President Ford is on the right track. He knows this 
country should not be put through this political charade that Gingrich 
is cooking up merely for political advantage. But the Senate majority 
leader said Ford's proposal is premature. I don't think you should 
start advocating what the punishment might be until you know the facts 
are. The republicans have the votes and a recommendation by the independent 
counsel, Kenneth star, to proceed with impeachment hearings. Starr 
says he first asked for permission to investigate the Lewinsky matter 
after learning about it from Linda Tripp. But "the New York Times" 
today reports that one of Starr's lawyers was actually tipped off 
earlier by an attorney with ties to Paula Jones' legal team. The times 
says those lawyers are all members of a legal organization called 
the federalists society that also found an attorney for Linda Tripp. 
This has given even more ammunition to the first lady's claims that 
this is part of a right-wing conspiracy. This evening, the White House 
released a statement questioning whether Starr was complete and accurate 
in disclosing information to the attorney general when he sought permission 
to expand the investigation into the Lewinsky matter. The White House 
statement ends with a paraphrase borrowed from the Watergate era asking, 
"what did the independent counsel know and when did it know it?" Carole? 
Thanks very much. Mike Von Fremd at the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>