<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981004.0806 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As a college student, he dreamed of becoming a Roman Catholic cardinal. 
Now, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso is asking Brazilians to have 
faith. ``The man who defeated inflation will lick unemployment,'' 
goes a re-election campaign slogan. And Brazilians have responded, 
rallying around the 67-year-old sociologist as a bastion against the 
economic chaos that threatens Brazil. Cardoso draws enduring confidence 
from the Plano Real, the economic program he devised in 1994 as finance 
minister that slashed 2,400 percent inflation to near zero. But the 
avuncular Cardoso also comes across as personally honest, a rare quality 
among Brazil's recent leaders. The last freely elected president before 
Cardoso, Fernando Collor de Mello, was impeached for corruption. So 
when Cardoso promised Brazilians austerity and possibly higher taxes 
to reduce a bloated budget deficit, many fell in behind him. It's 
been a long journey for the Marxist-influenced author and university 
professor to today's free-market champion. The son of army Capt. Leonidas 
Cardoso, he was born in Rio de Janeiro on June 18, 1931, and raised 
in upper middle-class comfort. The family shuttled between Rio and 
Sao Paulo as Capt. Cardoso rose through the ranks to general and a 
post in the War Ministry. The younger Cardoso studied French and the 
classics and decided to become a sociologist. After obtaining his 
doctorate at the University of Sao Paulo in 1961, Cardoso went to 
Paris for postdoctoral studies in industrial sociology at the Sorbonne. 
Back in Brazil, Cardoso was considered a subversive by the military 
regime that ruled from 1964 to 1985. He lived in exile in Chile and 
France for four years. Cardoso returned to Brazil in 1968 and helped 
found the Brazilian Analysis and Planning Center, one of the country's 
most prestigious think tanks. He also taught at foreign universities 
such as the Sorbonne, Cambridge, Stanford and the University of California 
at Berkeley. In 1985, he ran for mayor of Sao Paulo, South America's 
biggest city, but narrowly lost to former president Janio Quadros. 
A year later, he was elected senator for the Brazilian Democratic 
Movement Party, and in 1987 led a splinter group that became the Brazilian 
Social Democracy Party. In October 1992, then-President Itamar Franco 
appointed him foreign minister and, six months later, finance minister. 
With the success of the Plano Real in 1994, he was elected president 
on the first ballot. The president's wife, Ruth Cardoso, is also a 
sociologist. They have a son, two daughters and five grandchildren. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>