<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981004.0169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Police placed a leading democratic politician under protection Sunday 
following the murder of a popular government minister seen as a compromise 
candidate to end Mongolia's protracted political crisis. Friday's 
slaying of Infrastructure Minister Sanjaasuregiin Zorig shocked the 
capital, Ulan Bator, which has been locked in a four-month standoff 
between the governing Democratic Coalition and a resurgent opposition 
comprised largely of former communists. About 3,500 people turned 
out in near-freezing temperatures Saturday night to place lit candles 
in Zorig's memory on a wall outside Government House. More were expected 
to take part in candlelight vigils Sunday and Monday nights. Although 
police have not released a motive for Zorig's death, people at the 
vigil called it a political murder. Police released new details Sunday 
about the slaying. Zorig's assailants stole dlrs 300, gold earrings 
and bottles of vinegar and soy sauce from his apartment. Two men who 
claimed to have seen the killers as they left Zorig's home were being 
questioned. The slaying appeared to be planned. Police say the killers 
tied Zorig's wife up in the bathroom and then waited for him to come 
home. He was then stabbed with a knife and hacked with an axe. Zorig, 
a leader in the 1990 democratic revolution that ended seven decades 
of Soviet-sponsored Stalinism in Mongolia, was widely expected to 
be nominated next week as prime minister. He was supposed to meet 
an opposition leader on Saturday to try to win support. A colleague 
in the Democratic Coalition E. Bat Uul was placed under police protection 
Sunday, politicians said. President N. Bagabandi had rejected Bat 
Uul's nomination as prime minister last week, the fifth politician 
rejected in the standoff between the coalition and the opposition. 
The opposition Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party began a boycott 
of parliament in June after it accused the Democratic Coalition of 
trying to reap financial benefit for its members in a planned merger 
of a state bank and private bank. Prime Minister Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj 
then lost a vote of confidence and resigned with his Cabinet on July 
24, although he and his ministers have stayed on as caretakers. The 
confrontation has further soured popular support for the fledgling 
democracy and distracted government attention from mounting problems. 
More than a third of the landlocked country's 2 million people live 
in poverty, according to the World Bank, and inflation last year topped 
30 percent. But Zorig's death and the popular sympathy it has evoked 
may help end the standoff. Opposition MPRP leader N. Enkhbayar said 
Sunday he was considering shelving a motion to dissolve parliament. 
``Without compromise we cannot reach our common goal. We will fall 
victim to extreme nationalism,'' Enkhbayar said. ``This death can 
bring the three parties together and resolve the political deadlock.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>