<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981004.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Latvians have narrowly approved their parliament's controversial measures 
to ease citizenship requirements for the country's hundreds of thousands 
of stateless Russians in a referendum. The preliminary count of votes 
from all the country's precincts showed the changes approved by a 
53-45 margin in a Saturday referendum. The remaining ballots were 
blank marked incorrectly, in what elections commission chairman Andris 
Cinmars said may have been protest votes. Many voters had complained 
they were confused by the phrasing of the referendum question. The 
confusion was noted by a team of more than 100 international election 
observers, but ``nevertheless, the vote reflects the will of the Latvian 
people,'' said team head Mikko Elo of Finland. The referendum, which 
was held in conjunction with voting for the country's 100-seat Saeima 
parliament, ends years of delays for many citizenship applicants. 
It also means that children born of stateless parents since independence 
in 1991 will be granted citizenship. With the results, Latvia heads 
off a confrontation with the West. But whether the results will mollify 
Russia, which has denounced Latvia for its treatment of ethnic Russians, 
is in doubt. Although the changes remove years of waiting for citizenship 
applicants, the laws still require adults to have competence in Latvian, 
which many who grew up in all-Russian communities within Latvia regard 
as unreasonable. ``This is a turning point for Latvia. It will help 
us solve our problems with Russia because our friends in the West 
will stand behind us,'' Andris Skele, leader of the People's Party 
that led the parliamentary polling, said early Sunday. The amendments 
were first passed in June after a tense spring in which Russia threatened 
trade sanctions against its diminutive neighbor. But after the measures 
passed, a drive to overturn them began, spearheaded by nationalist 
politicians who claimed Latvian national identity was imperiled. Their 
campaign led to Saturday's referendum, which asks voters if they want 
to reject the amendments. After Latvia became independent of the Soviet 
Union in 1991, citizenship was granted to ethnic Latvians and to anyone 
who had lived there before the Soviet annexation in 1940. That left 
out the hundreds of thousands of ethnic Russians who poured into Latvia 
during Soviet rule and their children, even if born in Latvia. Today, 
about 452,000 of the country's 740,000 ethnic Russians are without 
citizenship. Some voting irregularities were reported, including President 
Guntis Ulmanis giving a television interview inside a polling station, 
and a polling station in the city of Jurmala failing to stamp about 
200 ballots properly. Of the 21 parties and alliances seeking seats 
in the Saeima (pronounced SIGH-mah), the right-wing Fatherland and 
Freedom party of Prime Minister Guntars Krasts was the only major 
party campaigning against the citizenship amendments. On issues other 
than citizenship, like the need to seek EU and NATO membership, there 
is wide agreement among the parties. There is also broad support for 
the free-market reforms that have raised Latvia up from the stagnant 
Soviet era. Voter support for one party or another appeared to depend 
as much on the personality of leaders as on specific issues. The new 
center-right Peoples Party was at the top with 20.9 percent. The conservative 
Latvia's Way had 18 percent, followed by the National Harmony Party, 
Fatherland and Freedom, the Union of Social Democrats and the New 
Party. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>