<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981004.0178 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As new stone-throwing clashes broke out Sunday in the West Bank, Israel 
and the Palestinians both said it was up to the other side whether 
any accord could be reached on an Israeli troop pullback. Meanwhile, 
security was tight in advance of a Jewish holiday beginning at sundown 
Sunday, and the Palestinian lands remained sealed off. U.S. Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright is due to arrive Tuesday for talks in 
advance of a hoped-for summit in Washington later this month, and 
both sides have been busy staking out positions in advance of her 
visit. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who has repeatedly accused 
the Palestinians of not doing enough to crack down on Islamic militants, 
said Israel's security was his paramount concern. ``Israel has shown 
its willingness to go the distance,'' he told reporters at a ceremony 
to usher in the Jewish holiday of Sukkot. ``Now it's up to the Palestinians 
to show their willingness to carry out their part.'' Yasser Arafat's 
Palestinian Authority has said it is working to contain militant groups 
like Hamas, but that even its best efforts cannot provide an ironclad 
guarantee against attacks. Two days before Albright's scheduled arrival, 
Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat expressed hopes for a speedy accord 
_ but said any movement must come from the Israeli side. ``She has 
one yes in her pocket; that is Arafat's yes,'' Erekat said of Albright. 
``In order to reach an agreement she needs a second yes, and that 
is Mr. Netanyahu's.'' The Palestinians earlier this year accepted 
terms of an American-authored initiative on an Israeli troop pullback, 
but Netanyahu balked, citing security concerns. Erekat spoke to reporters 
during a break in talks with Israeli Cabinet Secretary Danny Naveh. 
The two were mainly discussing secondary issues, including the so-called 
safe passsage that would permit Palestinian travel between the West 
Bank and Gaza Strip and the status of Palestinian prisoners. Sunday's 
West Bank clashes occurred near Hebron, marking the fifth straight 
day of skirmishing in or near the divided town. Hebron is home to 
450 Jewish settlers and 130,000 Palestinians and a frequent flashpoint 
for violence. In the latest fighting, a crowd of about 100 Palestinians 
gathered at the Israeli military checkpoint at the Halhul checkpoint 
outside Hebron, and some began throwing stones and bottles at the 
soldiers. The troops responded with rubber bullets and tear gas, but 
witnesses said no one was hurt during the two-hour disturbance. Later, 
at the village of Bani Naim outside Hebron, about 100 Palestinians, 
mainly teen-agers and elderly people, marched to protest what they 
said was illegal land confiscation by Jewish settlers. They marched 
to within 100 meters (yards) of a settlement and and Israeli troops 
took up protective positions, but the protest remained peaceful. Palestinians 
are angry about the closure of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, which 
with some brief easings has been in effect since Sept. 20, just before 
the Jewish New Year holiday. Army radio said the closure was expected 
to continue through the weeklong Jewish festival of Sukkot. Palestinians 
complain bitterly about closures, which prevent tens of thousands 
of workers from getting to jobs in Israel and cost the Palestinian 
economy millions in lost wages and commercial trade. In sealing off 
the Palestinian lands, Israel cited threats from Hamas, which has 
killed scores of Israelis in suicide bombings since 1994. The group 
vowed to carry out attacks after Israeli soldiers killed two wanted 
fugitives from the group last month. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>