<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981004.1830.0245 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC's Joe Johns is on Capitol Hill tonight, where the first formal 
steps which could lead to a vote on impeachment will be taken tomorrow 
morning. Good evening, Joe. Good evening, Len. When the gavel comes 
down tomorrow, the house Judiciary committee will make a choice that 
could affect the future of the government and conjure up powerful 
images of the past. In the same room where tomorrow's proceeding will 
occur, the house Judiciary committee embarked on its inquiry of impeachment 
for President Nixon in 1974. After weeks of closed-door meetings to 
hear evidence, the hearings were opened to television cameras, and 
Americans got to watch as democrats who controlled the committee and 
their republican opponents decided whether articles of impeachment 
drafted by their staffs should be submitted to the full house for 
a vote. Let us go forward in this debate with good will, Some on the 
committee in those days are still national figures today. And words 
spoken long ago still echo. A Mississippi congressman named Trent 
Lott was a newcomer then, sympathetic to President Nixon. Could any 
man withstand such scrutiny? Last week, Senate republican leader Trent 
Lott took a more critical view of President Clinton's situation. I 
think bad conduct is enough, frankly, for impeachment. In 1974, democrat 
John Conyers had been in Congress about seven years. He defended the 
way his majority party handled the issue of impeachment. If there 
is anything we must pull out of this impeachment process, it is the 
impeachment process itself. Today, Conyers leads the committee's minority. 
He claims the republicans are refusing to give the Clinton White House 
the courtesies that the Nixon White House got during the Watergate 
investigation. Nixon and his lawyers were there every minute, every 
step of the way, because it was not adversarial, it was not partisan. 
And it is right now. Democrats insist the case is about sex. Republicans 
disagree. Obstruction of justice, the whole process of subverting 
our judicial process were precisely the charges on which the impeachment 
articles against President Nixon were based. But a former democratic 
member of the committee, now out of Congress, sees few comparisons. 
This is really almost totally dissimilar to what we did 24 years ago. 
And I have the hope, frankly, that the house Judiciary committee, 
after looking at it, will say, "let's drop this." But republicans 
say it's still early to tell whether dropping the issue is even on 
option. They say they still have to get all the facts first, Len? 
NBC's Joe Johns on Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>