<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0061 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The melodrama was irresistible to playwright Pradeep Dalvi: An eloquent, 
idealistic thinker, who had studied the teachings of history, fires 
three bullets into the bony chest of this century's greatest apostle 
of nonviolence, Mohandas K. Gandhi, then puts down his gun and shouts 
for the police to arrest him. Audiences packed the Shivaji Mandir 
auditorium in July to see Dalvi's play about Gandhi's assassin, Nathuram 
Godse, 50 years after the murder of India's most beloved pacifist. 
Many theatergoers lustily cheered the killer's impassioned condemnations 
of Gandhi's philosophy. ``What kind of nonviolence is this?'' the 
protagonist asks. ``We are advised to keep quiet when Hindus are being 
massacred. But to allow a massacre is violence, not nonviolence.'' 
The drama won no fans in the Hindu nationalist-led government in New 
Delhi. Despite sold-out shows, ``I, Nathuram Godse Speaking,'' was 
shut down after only seven performances, banned as a threat to law 
and order on the strong recommendation of the national government. 
The play's producers say they will fight the ban in state court in 
coming weeks after they have the script translated into English from 
Marathi, as the court requires. The case touches on free speech, but 
also on Indians' complicated attitude toward the man considered the 
father of their nation _ and toward his assassin. Gandhi is a kind 
of secular saint here, but his ideals are admired more in principle 
than in practice. Recently, there has been a rash of plays and books 
that portray Gandhi as a flawed father and husband. They have been 
tolerated. But Dalvi's drama, which he says does not glorify the killer, 
has been widely interpreted as doing so. And that has proved more 
than the country's leaders are willing to countenance. If the producers 
lose their court battle to lift the ban, the drama's next venue may 
well be Dayton, Ohio. There, Harsh Trivedi, who heads a small foundation 
that promotes Indian culture, will put on his own English translation 
of the play in the spring. ``I had planned to tone down some of the 
provocative lines, but in view of the ban, which is quite shocking, 
I'll produce the play in full without changing anything,'' he said. 
Censorship has succeeded in bringing the drama to national prominence. 
A veritable army of columnists has dissected Godse's views. The play 
is largely based on court records and Godse's lengthy final speech 
to the court, as well as Dalvi's interviews with surviving conspirators. 
Godse's character, talking easily with the audience, narrates his 
evolution from a young militant who saw himself as a defender of Hindus 
to the man who committed the most dastardly crime in modern-day India. 
The play takes him through his trial and walk to the gallows. ``People 
came backstage to touch the feet of the actor who played Godse,'' 
Dalvi said. In his remarks to the court, Godse blamed Gandhi for the 
1947 partition of the country into Pakistan and India, which Gandhi 
lobbied against behind the scenes but did not crusade against in public. 
Hundreds of thousands were killed in the mass migration of Hindus 
and Moslems after the division. The assassin also condemned what he 
saw as Gandhi's favoritism toward Muslims. In his final fast, Gandhi, 
who believed the best way to peace between Hindus and Muslims lay 
in the generosity of the dominant Hindus, insisted that India pay 
predominantly Muslim Pakistan a financial settlement promised at partition. 
Ashis Nandy, a well-known political psychologist who is a senior fellow 
at the Center for the Study of Developing Societies in New Delhi, 
provocatively asserts that the murder cleared the way for India to 
become a conventional, modern nation built on reason, science and 
industry. Godse advocated what Nandy calls ``Kissingerian realpolitik'' 
_ that India should act in its own self-interest and strive to be 
a military and industrial power on the world stage. ``Godse articulated 
the myth of the modern nation-state in a way that the Indian middle-class 
would like to subscribe to, but he also killed Gandhi, so they feel 
morally uncomfortable about agreeing with some of Godse's ideas,'' 
Nandy said. ``That is why they would like to avoid confronting the 
issues raised by the play.'' The play certainly outraged guardians 
of Gandhian ideals across India. Even some of those who battled censorship 
under the British Raj say that restrictions on expression are occasionally 
justified in a country where words can lead to murderous outbreaks 
of violence between caste and religious groups. In 1989, the Congress 
Party made this argument to justify banning Salman Rushdie's novel 
``The Satanic Verses,'' which some Muslims said had blasphemed their 
God. And this ambivalence is written into India's constitution, which 
guarantees free expression but also allows it to be restricted in 
the interests of public order and morality. Critics say censorship 
has too often been used by elected officials who are really pandering 
to constituents _ in the case of Dalvi's play, the millions of Indians 
who revere Gandhi as a hallowed leader. But The Times of India, the 
nation's largest English-language daily, praised the decision. ``Any 
act condoning a heinous crime offends public morality, as well,'' 
it said. Dalvi said he got the idea for the play in the early 1980s 
when he met Godse's brother, Gopal, who kept the assassin's ashes 
in a pewter urn. ``I actually saw the ashes,'' Dalvi said. ``I touched 
them.'' The Stage Performances Scrutiny Board in Maharashtra, a culture 
police that exists in all Indian states, denied permission to produce 
the play when Dalvi first requested it in 1984. But when he asked 
again this year, three years after a Hindu nationalist coalition took 
power here, the board gave its approval. Bal Thackeray, the head of 
the Shiv Sena party leading the government, has made no secret of 
his admiration for Godse. ``We are not staunch Gandhians,'' said Pramod 
Navalkar, Maharashtra's Minister of Culture. ``But we respect Gandhi 
and we found that there was no insult to the Mahatma.'' Usha Mehta, 
a tiny 78-year-old woman who heads the Gandhi Memorial Trust in Bombay 
and who was once a soldier in Gandhi's nonviolent army, disagreed 
and single-handedly sparked the campaign against the play. She never 
saw the drama, but she was outraged when she read a newspaper article 
that quoted Dalvi as saying he hoped audiences would smash statues 
of Gandhi after seeing his play. Ms. Mehta immediately wrote a letter 
of protest to Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee. ``We as freedom 
fighters know the value of freedom of expression, but we certainly 
do not equate freedom with license,'' she said. Dalvi denies that 
he encouraged playgoers to smash Gandhi's statue and insists that 
he was only trying to explain, not justify, Godse's indefensible act. 
The opposition Congress Party led the fight to ban the play on the 
floor of Parliament in New Delhi. Vajpayee, who heads the Hindu nationalist 
Bharatiya Janata Party and seeks to distance it from Godse's brand 
of zealotry, asked Home Minister L.K. Advani to act. Advani, in turn, 
advised the state to ban the play. After the play's supporters and 
opponents clashed outside the theater on July 17, the state _ led 
by a coalition that includes Vajpayee's party _ held an emergency 
Cabinet meeting and bowed to the wishes of the government in New Delhi. 
The Bombay commissioner of police revoked the license to perform the 
play. Dalvi says his motives have been misunderstood and his rights 
violated. In an interview, he said that Nathuram Godse himself had 
become ``the hero of this thing'' and that Godse's co-conspirator 
and brother, Gopal, had credited the playwright with giving the assassin 
a voice from the grave. Dalvi quoted Gopal: ``Gopal said, `I could 
not take what Nathuram wanted to say to the people for 50 years. What 
I could not do in 50 years, Pradeep Dalvi did in eight days.''' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>