<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Congress poised to open the first presidential impeachment inquiry 
since the national agony of Watergate, the chairman of the House Judiciary 
Committee said Sunday that it was his ``hope and prayer'' to complete 
the investigation of President Clinton by the end of the year. The 
pledge by Rep. Henry Hyde came as a prelude to the bitter partisan 
and legal struggle expected to take place in the House Judiciary Committee 
on Monday. The committee is to consider whether to recommend, for 
only the second time this century, that Congress authorize a formal 
investigation into whether a president's actions should lead to his 
removal from office. With Republicans in the majority, it is considered 
inevitable that on Monday or Tuesday the committee, and later this 
week the full House, will vote to open a formal impeachment inquiry. 
The House vote will be one of Congress's last acts before it recesses 
for the midterm elections. Hyde sought on several television news 
programs Sunday to assure the nation that he would not seek to stretch 
out the scandal that has engulfed the White House for eight months, 
ever since Whitewater independent counsel Kenneth Starr began investigating 
the president's affair with Monica Lewinsky. ``I have a New Year's 
resolution, and that is we finish by New Year's,'' the Illinois Republican 
said on NBC's ``Meet the Press,'' ``and you know how New Year's resolutions 
sometimes get broken, but it's my hope and prayer that we could finish 
by New Year's.'' But some of Hyde's own Republican committee members 
resisted setting such a time limit, and Democrats expressed doubts 
that Hyde would be able to adhere to his pledge. ``New Year's resolutions 
sometimes get broken,'' said House Democratic Leader Dick Gephart 
of Missouri on ABC's ``This Week.'' ``I also don't have a lot of confidence 
from the way the Republicans have run other inquiries over these last 
two years that his wish will be followed.'' On Monday, Hyde's committee, 
one of the most ideologically polarized in Congress, will hear David 
Schippers, the investigative counsel for the Republicans, and Abbe 
Lowell, his counterpart for the Democrats, set out clashing views 
of the case for and against the president. In his hour-long presentation, 
Schippers plans to speak of the president's unique role in the American 
system of government and of the importance of the oath he takes to 
faithfully execute the nation's laws, according to Republicans. He 
is also expected to strike a very personal note about his own sorrow 
as a registered Democrat about the charges before him. Schippers will 
not emphasize the president's sexual relationship with Ms. Lewinsky, 
a former White House intern, but will argue the dangers to the nation's 
legal system if the president makes false statements under oath. Schippers 
is not expected to embrace all 11 charges of potentially impeachable 
offenses that Starr referred to Congress, and will likely differ with 
the independent counsel, for example, over Starr's charge that the 
president's claim of executive privilege in legal proceedings amounted 
to an abuse of power. And he is expected to add new criminal violations, 
according to Republicans, such as charges of lying under oath or a 
charge of concealment of a felony, Republicans said. A concealment 
charge could accuse the president or his aides of failing to alert 
a judge to a false affidavit, such as Ms. Lewinsky's claim in the 
Paula Jones sexual misconduct case that she had not had a sexual relationship 
with Clinton. Hyde said Schippers ``has reinterpreted and otherwise 
interpreted'' some of the material sent by Starr, ``so we have a little 
different take on it, not widely different.'' Hyde said that Congress 
was not judging private morality. ``We're talking about perjury, subornation 
of perjury, witness tampering, obstruction of justice,'' he said. 
In his own presentation, Lowell planned to explore the intent of the 
founding fathers when they put the power of impeachment into the Constitution 
and to cite historical precedents that have set a high threshold for 
removing a president from office. Another broad theme in his argument, 
according to a Democratic official, will be that in many cases Starr's 
evidence falls short of proving the offenses with which the independent 
counsel has charged the president. Last week, lawyers sympathetic 
to the president circulated an eight-page legal memorandum arguing 
that Starr had created a ``misleading chronology'' and an ``unfair 
rendering of the facts'' when he charged that Clinton ``endeavored 
to obstruct justice'' by helping Ms. Lewinsky find a job in New York 
when she faced being called in the sexual harassment case brought 
by Mrs. Jones. The lawyers argued that the facts showed that Ms. Lewinsky's 
desire to leave Washington arose long before she was named in the 
Jones case and that the president ``provided only modest assistance.'' 
Rep. John Conyers of Michigan, the senior Democrat on the Judiciary 
Committee, also said Sunday that he did not believe false statements 
under oath ``in and of themselves'' are necessarily impeachable. ``The 
answer is that it is unclear and probably not,'' he said. The meeting 
of the House Judiciary Committee will set in motion only the third 
presidential impeachment process in the history of the republic. Aware 
of the high stakes, Republicans and Democrats on the committee each 
took home large briefing books over the weekend to help them prepare 
for an all-day session expected to be widely televised. ``I truly 
hope that the president is not impeached, '' Rep. James Rogan, R-Calif., 
said on ABC's ``This Week.'' ``I hope that when this is all over, 
we can exonerate him. I'm not sure where the facts are going to lead.'' 
Late Monday or on Tuesday, the committee is expected to vote along 
party lines, with Republicans pushing through a recommendation that 
Congress investigate ``fully and completely whether sufficient grounds 
exist for the House of Representatives to exercise its constitutional 
power to impeach William Jefferson Clinton.'' The wording is modeled 
after the impeachment resolution used to open the investigation into 
Richard Nixon and the Watergate scandal. Democrats will vote for their 
own proposal to limit any inquiry to the Lewinsky affair and to complete 
it by Nov. 25. They would set up a two-step process in which the committee 
first sought to define what it considered an impeachable offense and 
then see if any evidence against the president met that threshold. 
Only after that would the committee decide whether to open a formal 
impeachment inquiry. While the committee is expected to split along 
party lines, it is not clear whether Democrats from conservative or 
swing districts will choose to vote in the full House with the Republicans 
on the impeachment inquiry once the Democratic proposal is voted down. 
Once the House opens an impeachment inquiry, it is up to the Judiciary 
Committee to hold hearings and clear the president or vote on articles 
of impeachment. The House then must decide whether to impeach _ the 
equivalent of an indictment. In 1974, Nixon resigned before the House 
took its impeachment vote. If the House approves articles of impeachment, 
the Senate then holds an impeachment trial of the president and acts 
as the jury. It takes a two-thirds majority to convict a president 
and remove him from office. By its nature impeachment is both a quasi-judicial 
and a political process, and both political parties will be carefully 
watching the midterm elections to see whether they produce a landslide 
against the president's party or offer any mandate on how to proceed. 
Hyde conceded Sunday that, at present, there are not the votes in 
the Senate to remove the president from office. ``That would have 
to be done by the Senate in a bipartisan way,'' he said. ``They won't 
do that until the American people move, and they have to move from 
where they apparently are if the polls are true.'' Even if Republicans, 
as some strategists predict, pick up five Senate seats in November, 
they would still fall short of the number needed to remove Clinton 
from office unless Democrats swing to their side. While they have 
accused the Republicans of moving too quickly to judge Clinton, Democrats 
too are treading a careful line. Their alternative proposal is an 
acknowledgment that they are not willing to stop the impeachment process 
right now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>