<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0199 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Houston Astros traded for Randy Johnson hoping that he could lead 
them to a World Series. But the Astros' vaunted offense scored just 
two runs for him in two division series games, and Sunday night the 
San Diego Padres defeated him again, 6-1, to advance to the National 
League Championship Series. The Padres, who had beaten Johnson by 
2-1 in Game 1, won the three-of-five-game series, 3-1, and will face 
the Braves in Atlanta on Wednesday in Game 1 of the NLCS. Jim Leyritz 
continued his post-season heroics with a second-inning home run off 
Johnson, and the Padres nicked Johnson for an unearned run in the 
bottom of the sixth inning to break a 1-1 tie in front of 64,898 at 
Qualcomm Stadium. And after pinch-hitter John Vander Wal tripled and 
Wally Joyner homered in a four-run eighth, the Padres had advanced 
to their first championship series in 14 years. Each of the first 
three games in this series were decided by one run. On Saturday, San 
Diego Manager Bruce Bochy had gambled by starting Kevin Brown, who 
pitched in Game 1, on three days' rest. San Diego won that game on 
Leyritz's seventh-inning home run. Houston Manager Larry Dierker had 
saved Johnson for an elimination situation. And Dierker was hoping 
Sunday that Johnson could get the series back to Houston for a deciding 
game Monday night, where Shane Reynolds had already flown home in 
anticipation of the Game 5 start. In his six innings, Johnson allowed 
just three hits and one walk while striking out eight. But Johnson's 
defense failed him in the sixth. Now, Johnson is 0-5 in his last six 
post-season starts dating to 1995. Astros General Manager Gerry Hunsicker, 
who acquired Johnson minutes before the trading deadline on July 31, 
said before Sunday's game: ``That's the guy we were missing, that 
dominating go-to guy when your back is to the wall and your season's 
on the line. If we can beat them today, the momentum clearly shifts 
back to us.'' And if not? ``If we don't win this series, I won't have 
enjoyed this year,'' said Hunsicker, even though the Astros won their 
second consecutive NL Central title with a franchise-record 102 victories. 
The Padres had acquired Leyritz from Boston on June 21, for two relievers 
and a catcher, for altogether different reasons. San Diego General 
Manager Kevin Towers said Sunday that his team desperately needed 
some right-handed hitting help. And when he was told by the Cardinals 
that Gary Gaetti was not available, Towers pursued Leyritz, whose 
agent, Adam Katz, had told Towers his client wanted a trade from the 
Red Sox. Leyritz has a sparkling post-season history. But Sunday afternoon, 
after Leyritz's second homer of the series had propelled San Diego 
to a 2-1 victory in Game 3 on Saturday night, Padres Manager Bruce 
Bochy said: ``Never in my wildest dreams did I think he would be doing 
what he has done for us this past week.'' And then, in his first at-bat 
Sunday against his old nemesis Johnson, Leyritz went out and did it 
again. The animosity between Johnson and Leyritz began on May 31, 
1995, when Johnson, pitching for Seattle, hit Leyritz in the face 
with a fastball to spark a brawl. Leyritz said earlier this week that 
he and Johnson had cleared the air. But even though Leyritz had collected 
a key sacrifice fly against Johnson in San Diego's Game 1 victory 
in Houston, Leyritz was just 5 for 40 (.125) with one career home 
run against the imposing left-hander when Game 4 began. But in the 
post-season overall, Leyritz was 12 for 33 with five home runs. And 
when Leyritz hit a belt-high fastball 422 feet to left-center field 
to lead off the second, he had his sixth post-season home run and 
the Padres had an early 1-0 lead against Johnson, who was not throwing 
nearly as hard as he had in Game 1. Johnson's fastball was being clocked 
at only 91 to 93 mph for most of the game. Sterling Hitchcock's fastball 
was not reaching those speeds, but the left-hander was in synch with 
his personal catcher, Leyritz, from the game's first pitch, and Hitchcock 
kept the strongest lineup in the league off balance with an assortment 
of fastballs, curveballs and splitters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>