<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Oct. 5: The New 
York Yankees would no doubt prefer to have all eyes trained on their 
quest for another World Series title. But their inspiring on-field 
performance cannot shut out that other fall classic _ the struggle 
over the future of their storied stadium. Recent developments fortify 
the case for keeping this ball club in its historic home in the Bronx. 
Gov. George Pataki has affirmed his support for this location. The 
possibilities for upgrading the structure and enhancing the surrounding 
neighborhood were laid out in a new $535 million renovation plan, 
drafted by a respected architectural firm at the behest of Bronx Borough 
President Fernando Ferrer. That plan and others like it should whet 
everyone's appetite for a competition to design a stadium, a museum 
and surrounding amenities worthy of baseball's premier franchise. 
Architectural drawings, of course, are more likely to fire the public's 
imagination than the words uttered by a governor in re-election mode. 
Nevertheless, Gov. Pataki's pledge that the Yankees ``belong in the 
Bronx, period'' is not some throwaway line from a cheerleader in Albany. 
His words derive their power from his control over the ball-park site 
he does not mention: the West Side rail yards in Manhattan. They are 
owned by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, whose board the 
governor controls. The West Side is the option that often elicits 
rhapsodic comments from George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal 
owner, and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. The governor, however, has a fiduciary 
responsibility to safeguard this MTA endowment to help finance future 
capital needs for buses, subways and commuter rail lines. That responsibility 
makes the sale of this site problematic. The 26 acres and air rights, 
conservatively valued at a minimum of $200 million, should only be 
sold when the authority can reap the maximum value. That opportunity 
will not occur during the current turbulence in financial markets. 
The authority may even want to develop the site itself if that is 
the best way to generate substantial revenues. Sale of this nest egg 
now, at a price depressed either by market conditions or by a desire 
to placate the Yankees, would be imprudent. The interests of millions 
of subway riders, commuters and transit-dependent businesses would 
be betrayed. Steinbrenner has declined to show his hand on the stadium 
issue until after the World Series and the gubernatorial election. 
Even so, his distaste for remaining in the Bronx is well known. Meanwhile, 
all appears quiet west of the Hudson, despite recent sports coverage 
in The Star-Ledger of Newark promoting the idea of developing a privately 
financed stadium in New Jersey. Gov. Christine Todd Whitman's anti-poaching 
policy still seems to be in force. Absent credible evidence that the 
Yankees are about to cross the Hudson, the argument for the West Side 
option looks weak. There is no mystery about what would please most 
New York fans. That would be having the Yankees dazzle us and future 
generations in a renovated or new stadium in the Bronx. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>