<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dennis Vacco, New York's attorney general, did not have a primary 
challenge to worry about this year. Neither has he had to fret about 
money _ his campaign war chest is bulging. And he has picked up good 
publicity lately on issues like cracking down on unscrupulous health 
insurers and arresting child pornographers. Not a bad position to 
be in during an election year. But now, not even three weeks into 
the general election campaign, Vacco, the Republican incumbent, finds 
himself locked in what most experts and recent polls indicate is shaping 
up as the most competitive of the three major races for statewide 
offices this year. The Democratic challenger, Eliot Spitzer, has mounted 
a broad assault against Vacco _ on television and in speeches and 
fliers _ seeking to force him to defend his integrity and to answer 
charges that he has turned the office into a patronage mill. Spitzer, 
a wealthy Manhattan lawyer, who is using his and his family's money 
to finance his campaign, proved to be a formidable candidate during 
a tough four-way primary race, and has been just as aggressive since 
then. Vacco dismisses Spitzer's attacks as unfounded and points to 
a record that includes fighting crime, protecting consumers and cleaning 
up the environment. Vacco began the general election campaign by calling 
on Spitzer to refrain from attacks, but then started raising questions 
about the source of Spitzer's money. ``Hey, Eliot: Show me the money,'' 
blasted a headline from a flier recently distributed by Vacco's campaign, 
adding in smaller print: ``Vacco campaign calls for answers to questions 
about Spitzer campaign cash.'' Spitzer wasted little time in firing 
back. ``Hey, Dennis, stop trying to turn away attention from your 
record of cronyism,'' said a flier his campaign put out. The stakes 
in the race are high. The attorney general has a staff of 450 lawyers 
who are responsible for defending the state against hundreds of lawsuits 
each year, as well as enforcing its environmental, consumer and other 
laws. And the attorney general, along with the governor and the comptroller, 
are New York's three major officeholders elected by a statewide vote. 
The major point of contention in the contest between Vacco and Spitzer 
is who has the integrity and competence to be New York's top law enforcement 
officer. Spitzer, a moderate, has emphasized his experience as a prosecutor 
_ he was head of the Manhattan District Attorney's labor racketeering 
unit _ and as a civic advocate in making his case. He has also focused 
on popular issues, from protecting customers from price gouging to 
forcing corporate polluters to clean up the Hudson River and using 
product liability laws to force gun manufacturers to install safety 
locks. More important, though, he has waged a vigorous campaign against 
Vacco. He has argued that Vacco has neglected the duties of the attorney 
general's office and in the process has compromised the well-being 
of New Yorkers. He has attacked what he says is the incumbent's reluctance 
to take on tobacco companies, corporate polluters and other powerful 
interests because they are major supporters of the state Republican 
Party. But the thrust of his attacks has been on what he describes 
as Vacco's politicization of the office. In speeches, fliers, letters 
and a recent television advertisement, Spitzer contends that Vacco 
has undermined the professionalism of the office by dismissing dozens 
of experienced lawyers and replacing them with younger, inexperienced 
lawyers with ties to the Republican and Conservative Parties. Last 
Monday, a federal judge in Albany threw out a lawsuit filed by two 
former assistant attorneys general who said that Vacco had dismissed 
them because of their political affiliations. The judge, Rosemary 
Pooler, said that even if those claims were correct, the attorney 
general had the right to hire lawyers who shared his political views. 
Vacco's campaign said that the ruling should put an end to the issue, 
noting that Judge Pooler, as a Democrat, had sided with the attorney 
general. ``Even respected Democrats recognize the frivolity of these 
politically motivated lawsuits brought by disgruntled former employees,'' 
said Matthew Behrmann, Vacco's campaign manager. While the court decision 
might have blunted some of the sharpness of Spitzer's political jabs, 
it did nothing to deter him from continuing to hammer away at the 
issue. ``The question is not whether it is legal to run a political 
patronage mill out of the attorney general's office,'' Steven Goldstein, 
the spokesman for the Spitzer campaign, said in response. ``The question 
is whether it is unethical. As virtually every major newspaper in 
this state has pointed out already, it is certainly not ethical, and 
that is what the court of public opinion will decide in November.'' 
One of the most recent public polls on the attorney general's race 
showed Vacco and Spitzer in a statistical dead heat among all registered 
voters. But the survey _ the Quinnipiac College Poll, which was released 
on Sept. 27 _ showed Vacco with a slight lead over Spitzer, 40 percent 
to 35 percent, among likely voters. Part of Spitzer's strategy from 
the start has been to try to overcome whatever advantage Vacco has, 
including incumbency, by turning to a deep campaign war chest. But 
even that has turned into a campaign issue. The Vacco campaign notes 
that in a previous bid for the Democratic nomination for attorney 
general in 1994, Spitzer lent his campaign $4.3 million even though 
his tax returns showed that he had a total income of only $559,000 
for both 1993 and 1994. Spitzer responded that the money he spent 
on the campaign came from his savings, his income as a lawyer and 
his father, Bernard Spitzer, a wealthy real estate developer. But 
Vacco is expected to mount a high-spending campaign of his own. He 
has already raised more than $3.2 million and is widely expected to 
receive more from the state Republican Party should he run into trouble. 
Beyond that, he could benefit from the popularity of the Republican 
governor, George Pataki. A conservative who took office at a time 
of a national Republican ascendancy, Vacco has done an effective job 
of expanding his platform beyond the narrow law-and-order one he ran 
on in 1994. He has embraced moderate issues as the electorate itself 
has become more moderate in recent years. He has cast himself as a 
defender of consumers, a protector of the environment and a champion 
of women's issues. He has even become a convert on the contentious 
issue of litigation against the tobacco industry. When he first took 
office, he refused to join a nationwide lawsuit that sought to recoup 
from tobacco makers the billions of dollars that states spent treating 
tobacco-related illnesses. He said that would be akin to suing dairy 
producers for cholesterol-related diseases caused by their products. 
His position led critics to charge that he was being soft on cigarette 
makers only because they were major contributors to the state Republican 
Party. He eventually joined in the lawsuits against the tobacco companies 
and is now an outspoken critic of the industry, though opponents contend 
that his conversion was a cynical political move. Vacco rose from 
political obscurity in 1994 when he became New York's first Republican 
attorney general in nearly two decades. He had been a career prosecutor 
who had never held elective office. Spitzer is a political newcomer 
himself. He, too, is a career lawyer who was a prosecutor in the Manhattan 
district attorney's office and is now a partner in a Manhattan law 
firm. More than that, however, the men share similar positions on 
some major issues. Both are supporters of the death penalty. And they 
emphasize their experience as prosecutors fighting crime, even though 
combating street crime is largely handled by local district attorneys, 
not the attorney general of the state. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>