<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0127 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
World financial markets are in turmoil. Hedge funds are bleeding billions. 
But with consumers confused and investors scared, a measure that supporters 
say would modernize the United States' financial system and make it 
more globally competitive is stuck in Congress, caught in the crosscurrents 
of several political fights. In the tension between policy and politics, 
politics is winning out as the measure approaches the finish line. 
The bill, which Congress has debated for two decades, would eliminate 
barriers separating banks, insurance companies and brokers and allow 
them to merge into new financial conglomerates. The first fight that 
could derail it pits Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board chairman, 
who has been arm-twisting for the bill, against Robert Rubin, the 
Treasury secretary, who opposes it. This battle has nothing to do 
with financial policy but is a bitter turf fight over who will be 
the top regulator in the financial world of the future. Then there 
is the tight Senate race in New York. The incumbent, Alfonse D'Amato, 
a Republican and chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, has been 
tirelessly pushing for the bill. It could give him a major legislative 
victory, especially for his hometown financial industry and longtime 
financial backers, as the race moves into the final stretch. A victory 
would portray D'Amato as someone who can deliver a big bill, the most 
important piece of financial legislation in decades. In a squeeze 
is his Democratic opponent, Rep. Charles Schumer, who voted for the 
bill in May but has done little since. He risks upsetting his Wall 
Street supporters if he does not prevail on fellow Democrats in Congress 
and in the administration to enact this bill. But while its passage 
could polish his image, too, as someone who can get things done in 
Washington, it would also hand a public relations victory to D'Amato. 
Finally, there is President Clinton, who has threatened to veto the 
measure even as he lectures Japan and other Asian nations on modernizing 
their financial systems. His motivation? Those close to the process 
suggest that it is to ``look presidential'' amid his own political 
problems by waving the veto pen, to deny Republicans a legislative 
victory on a bill that Democrats have never been able to get out of 
Congress and to deny glory to D'Amato, who harshly criticized the 
Clintons during the Senate Whitewater hearings. Besides, Rubin opposes 
it, and Clinton trusts Rubin. ``There are big political currents on 
this bill,'' said Martin Farmer, a lobbyist for the Independent Bankers 
of America, a trade group. ``There are fist fights going on, and it's 
all getting pretty intense.'' But D'Amato said simply: ``Financial 
modernization is long overdue. It's good for the country, good for 
the state, but it's not a political issue.'' Oddly enough, it appears 
there are enough votes in the Senate to pass the bill if these political 
battles do not scuttle it. In May, the House passed the measure by 
a single vote. But since then, various industry groups that had been 
fighting one another have settled their differences and now back the 
bill. Moreover, support is largely bipartisan, with enough Democratic 
and Republican support to eliminate party-line fights. ``In the middle, 
there is overwhelming consensus to get this bill passed,'' said an 
aide to a Democratic Senate leader. ``The question is whether this 
bill will be pulled apart at the edges, or is there enough heft in 
the middle to roll it through. As a political matter, it's gotten 
weird.'' Robert Russbuldt, executive vice president of the Independent 
Insurance Agents of America, added: ``You have a bill before the Senate 
that now has no substantial private-sector opposition. You have historic 
agreements between many industries once antagonistic. The issues on 
the table now are not substantive; they are political.'' Perhaps the 
weirdest fight of all is between Greenspan and Rubin. Technically, 
it is over how financial institutions of the future would be structured, 
as bank holding companies with numerous affiliates or as banks with 
numerous subsidiaries. Most banks, brokers and insurance companies 
don't care which structure is chosen; they just want the bill to pass. 
The difference is that if the bank holding company structure is chosen, 
the Federal Reserve becomes the nation's top financial regulator; 
if the affiliate structure is selected, the Treasury Department keeps 
its hold. So far, Greenspan is winning. The bill has the Federal Reserve 
as the top regulator, and efforts by Rubin and the Treasury to shift 
it were defeated by a 3-to-1 ratio in the House and resoundingly in 
the Senate Banking Committee. Even Democrats did not support Rubin, 
a Democrat, on this issue. The reason? Congress loves Greenspan. ``Every 
time Greenspan has come to pitch Congress, they've sided with him,'' 
said Dan Zielenski, a lobbyist for the American Insurance Association. 
``He's got the stature as the lord high protector of the economy, 
and if Greenspan is saying it is not safe to vote the other way, what 
member of Congress wants to take the risk of voting against Alan Greenspan?'' 
But Rubin has something in his back pocket: the threat of a presidential 
veto. So far, the Treasury has refused to negotiate with lawmakers 
or lobbyists, preferring a ``just say no'' attitude in the belief 
that this veto threat will cause Congress, ultimately, to change the 
bill. There are two theories to explain this strategy. One is that 
Rubin, formerly a Wall Street trader, is engaged in a game of political 
``liar's poker'' and, to gain maximum leverage, will not give an inch 
until the last minute. The other theory is simpler _ that he means 
what he says. A top administration official, who spoke on the condition 
of anonymity, said the latter theory was correct. ``Unless the concerns 
we have expressed are fully satisfied _ and we have not seen any movement 
at all in that direction _ as far as I'm concerned, the bill is on 
a veto track.'' So what happens if the bill, with Greenspan as the 
top regulator, is passed by the Senate this week and lands on the 
president's desk? Here again, theories abound. One is that given the 
financial turmoil everywhere, the president would have a hard time 
not signing a measure that the entire financial services industry 
says is needed. Another theory holds that the president would also 
have a hard time saying no to congressional Democrats, especially 
close allies, who have been trying to pass the bill for two decades, 
or to a Congress that has worked, with bipartisan cooperation, on 
this measure for two years _ and all over a bureaucratic turf fight. 
That said, he would also be loath to hand a victory to a Republican 
Congress or do anything that could help return a Republican to the 
Senate, especially in the key New York race. Based on some of the 
president's statements, some say Clinton may duck behind the argument 
that the bill is anti-consumer because it does not greatly expand 
provisions of the Community Reinvestment Act, which requires banks 
to provide low-cost services to low- and moderate-income consumers. 
But that could prove to be a flimsy reason because the bill maintains 
the status quo on that issue and actually expands it a bit. In late 
September, a delegation of Wall Street executives, including Sanford 
Weill, chief executive of Travelers Group, and John Reed, chief executive 
of Citicorp, called on Rubin. But their efforts were to no avail. 
``We told the Wall Street CEOs that our veto is still in place,'' 
one White House official said. ``We told them they should put pressure 
on Congress to change the bill to the Treasury regulatory structure.'' 
And there is another potent obstacle in the Senate. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, 
has vowed to kill the bill with a filibuster and deft parliamentary 
maneuvers because it does not eliminate any and all Community Reinvestment 
Act obligations on banks, something Gramm has compared to slavery. 
On this point, to the dismay of the Republican leadership, Gramm is 
acting on his own convictions. No one in the financial services industry 
supports his view. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>