<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0140 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The thing about the people in ``Unmade Beds,'' Nicholas Barker's docu-narrative 
about four New Yorkers searching for love and marriage, sex and companionship, 
or the money that sex and companionship can secure, is that they are 
the kind of people that movies about romance have always relegated 
to the sidelines. They don't have the physical glamour or charisma 
that makes us eager to believe that the leading man and woman will 
find each other (and therefore happiness) against all narrative odds. 
Barker's leads are real people, characters in a highly stylized film. 
But it is easy to see the roles they would have played in romantic 
comedies and dramas of the last 50 years. They would have been cast 
as the sidekicks, the foils who get the plot leavings. The two women 
would be seen as infinitely less desirable than the leading lady. 
One is fat, which puts the emphasis on pathos; one is visibly working 
class, which puts the emphasis on wisecracks jauntily uttered in a 
broad neighborhood accent. The men would be similarly cast, but there 
would be a touch of rivalry in their relations with the leading man. 
They would court the top girl, but to no avail. One is sweet and even 
playful, but not sexy; the other is self-centered, with a touch _ 
make that an all-enveloping layer _ of sleaze. The gilded stars are 
gone now, and so is the protective coloration of fiction. ``Unmade 
Beds'' is certainly artful _ a little smugly so, with its repeated 
device of framing people through apartment windows as they dress, 
undress or (occasionally) make love. Barker, a British television 
and radio producer, shaped the script from conversations he had in 
1996 and 1997 with his subjects. (Or are they better described as 
his objects?) They are very conscious of their roles as characters 
here, and they deserve their billing, which reads: ``And Starring 
as Themselves: Brenda Monte, Aimee Copp, Mikey Russo and Michael De 
Stefano.'' Good nonfiction has to be as carefully shaped as good fiction, 
and I'm not bothered at all by this artifice. ``Unmade Beds'' is a 
set of cinematic memoirs. And each has just one subject _ the desperate 
search for a mate in a city of equally desperate strangers. Ranging 
in age from their late 20s to late 40s or early 50s (the two older 
ones don't specify), all four people do the same things. They advertise 
in the personals and answer them. They go on disappointing to mortifying 
dates that we never witness. We hear their pre-date hopes and anxieties 
and witness their post-date depressions. They mock, they weep, they 
brood; they pull out every available emotional defense, from cynicism 
to dogged ``the sun will come out tomorrow'' optimism. Michael De 
Stefano would be the ineffectual suitor in an old movie. He is earnest, 
rueful and 5-feet-4-inches tall. He insists upon telling women his 
height in advance (truth in advertising, he says, a tad grimly) and 
finds that they usually don't want to meet him. (Women who insist 
that they want to date nice men don't, he tells us: they give it away 
to jerks.) Aimee Copp is the standard good friend, the one who always 
sends the leading lady off to the leading man (risk everything, she 
says), and is left alone in the little flat they once shared as bachelor 
girls. She is a disturbing blend of vigor and pathos, and she is funny 
telling us that at 28, with a good job and health insurance, she should 
certainly be a bargain to all the 40-year-old losers she meets who 
have neither. She has just split up with her last boyfriend, a cabdriver 
in his 40s who liked her to wear leather and use a whip when they 
had sex. And she is funny when she lets out a raucous giggle and says: 
``I mean, it's pretty embarrassing. I was dumped by a submissive.'' 
But it is humiliating when her slim friend, Lori, tells her she must 
go to a personal dating service or lose a lot of weight, and when 
the members of her conventional Midwestern family assure her that 
they will support her if she decides to become a single mother. She 
takes it as a sign that they have given up all hope that she will 
ever find a husband. Her interpretation is probably correct. Mikey 
Russo is the type of seedy playboy who always gets his sexual comeuppance 
eventually. Mikey brings old-fashioned words like wolf and, alas, 
even pig to mind, with his talk about dating only beautiful women 
_ no ``mutts'' for him, just beauties _ and his view that while he 
is no Paul Newman or Robert Redford, he is a Jack Nicholson or Harvey 
Keitel type. He has his tricks ready whenever he meets a ``mutt''; 
he gets a friend to ring his beeper, pleads a work emergency, pays 
for the woman's drink and gives her taxi fare. But his payback moment 
is awful to watch. He relates how he met a woman for dinner after 
what seemed to be a good telephone conversation and took her to a 
very expensive restaurant, where, at the evening's end, she told him 
she would be embarrassed to introduce him to her friends because he 
wasn't high up enough on the corporate ladder. She is a judge. And 
what is he? We've heard him say he wrote screenplays, mostly for television 
dramas. No, he admits, that is what he tells women. He does write 
screenplays. But he has never sold one. It is hard to gloat. By this 
time, the round of search and hope, search and reject or search and 
psychically destroy is so endless we feel we're in a world that is 
the romantic equivalent of a nuclear waste dump. Hollywood's classic 
romantic comedies flourished during an economic depression. The depression 
hanging over the nation now is sexual and psychological. The only 
one who triumphs is the utterly antiromantic Brenda Monte, a divorcee 
with a va-va-va-voom figure (at one point she displays and briskly 
itemizes all of its major virtues and minor flaws) and a mouthful 
of buoyant wisecracks. You can always find sex, Brenda says. What 
she wants is a man who will give her enough money to pay her debts 
in exchange for as little sex and companionship as possible. It is 
Brenda who manages to generate real star power and turn a narrative 
that could be pitiful or cynical into something with comic hopefulness. 
Brenda knows how to improvise. In the end, here is what is so unsettling 
about ``Unmade Beds'': You can distance yourself from it in all sorts 
of ways _ ``I'm much more successful and attractive''; ``I'm married 
with children''; ``I put personal ads in The New York Review of Books, 
not The Village Voice or The Free Press.'' But you have friends who 
are or have been just as desperate, you remember perfectly well when 
you were and perhaps you dread a time when you might be again. And 
you also know that even if they find mates after the camera stops, 
their fantasies may still go unmet. There are all kinds of unhappy 
endings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>