<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0135 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
LONDON _ ``The obsession that taunts us all, Sex.'' So speaks the 
doomed, noble Phedre of her illicit, ruinous passion for her stepson 
in the stark new West End production of Racine's tragedy, which _ 
Oops. Scratch that. That's not Phedre talking. That's a headline that 
appeared in a tabloid here the day after the videotapes of President 
Clinton's testimony about his illicit, ruinous passion for a White 
House intern were made public. What Phedre, played by an intense Diana 
Rigg from a new translation by Ted Hughes, says is, ``Venus fastened 
on me like a tiger.'' This is not to be confused with what the rugby 
star Will Carling, in articles that temporarily knocked Clinton off 
the front pages, said about his love for the late Princess of Wales. 
Nor with what the chastity-challenged Ado Annie sings in the vibrant, 
smash-hit revival of ``Oklahoma!'' at the Royal National Theater here. 
Nor, for that matter, with what those working-class men with gold 
chains and half-buttoned shirts (who appear to have modeled their 
look on that of the Brooklyn street studs in the new assembly-line 
stage adaptation of the movie ``Saturday Night Fever'') had to say 
about their compulsive promiscuity on a recent chat show. Has there 
ever been a moment, at least since the days of Shakespeare, when what 
is seen in British theaters so literally reflected the fixations of 
the country, regardless of class or intellectual persuasion? Whether 
in institutional or commercial theaters, in the claustrophobic studios 
of London's fringes or the shabby splendor of the West End, the subject, 
more often than not, is sex and the havoc it wreaks in the lives of 
ordinary and extraordinary people. Despite enough bared bums, breasts 
and genitalia onstage to stock a year's run of ``Oh! Calcutta!'' the 
overall effect is hardly salacious, to use a word much favored by 
journalists here. There are only faint echoes of the titters and smirks 
of standard British sex farces with titles like ``Run for Your Wife.'' 
Dramas of infidelity remain a staple, but minus the four-hankie sentiment 
of a Terrence Rattigan. The mood instead runs from aloof, condemning 
cynicism to scathing anger. The new templates of the genre are Patrick 
Marber's wildly acclaimed ``Closer,'' a brutal look at an internecine 
romantic quadrangle (headed for Broadway next year), and Mark Ravenhill's 
notorious ``Shopping and ... '' (seen in New York last season), works 
in which carnal knowledge, explicitly documented, is unsatisfying 
and unenlightening. The hottest ticket in London is David Hare's ice-cold 
reworking of ``La Ronde,'' by Arthur Schnitzler. This is the two-character 
show in which the movie star Nicole Kidman has made her London stage 
debut to delirious reviews, playing five women who look for love in 
all the wrong places, the point being that no place is the right place. 
The single most unsettling, and representative, image to emerge from 
my 10 days of playgoing here comes from Ravenhill's latest offering, 
``Handbag,'' in which a young woman is digitally brought to orgasm, 
by a man who might as well be a vibrator, while standing up and wearing 
a mask that suggests an extraterrestrial pig. She is transformed by 
sex, for sure, but not into anything human. Let's not forget that 
for centuries England has been dancing an uneasy waltz between tight-lipped 
puritanism (think Oliver Cromwell) and open-mouthed hedonism (think 
Christine Keeler), nor that the sort of sexual shenanigans now tainting 
the American presidency are nothing new to the British. In living 
memory, the country has seen a government unseated and its monarchy 
threatened by such activities. Both phenomena are currently represented 
on the boards with the West End production of ``A Letter of Resignation,'' 
Hugh Whitemore's look at the Profumo scandal of the 1960s, and the 
delectably silly and oddly affecting ``Love Upon the Throne'' (written 
by Patrick Barlow and performed by Barlow and John Ramm, the entire 
company of the self-styled National Theater of Brent), in which two 
middle-aged, bespectacled men in business suits awkwardly enact the 
troubled courtship and marriage of Prince Charles and Lady Diana. 
There's a genuine warmth to ``Throne,'' something notably absent from 
much of the rest of London's popular theatrical fare. This doesn't 
mean, however, that audience and critical response to consciously 
chilly productions has been comparably detached. The English clearly 
like to have their cake and drool over it, too. Just consider the 
reviews garnered by Ms. Kidman in the Donmar Warehouse production 
of ``The Blue Room,'' staged by the omnipresent Sam Mendes, with Iain 
Glen (a classical actor who, surprisingly, tends toward cartoonishness 
here) playing the other halves of a series of erotically linked couples. 
That Ms. Kidman gives an exceptionally proficient performance, nimbly 
shifting accents and embodying characters from a Cockney streetwalker 
to a self-dramatizing, self-adoring stage star, was duly noted by 
most critics. But what really wowed 'em was the perfection of her 
body, seen in various states of undress and briefly in the altogether. 
The Evening Standard, which knows its priorities, wedged a brief critical 
appraisal of the play beneath a splashy assessment of Ms. Kidman's 
physique. The reviewer for The Daily Telegraph called the performance 
``pure theatrical Viagra.'' Well, maybe, if you're stimulated by the 
idea of copulation as a purely mechanical activity, something wittily 
emphasized here by the supertitles that tabulate the time consumed 
by each sexual act. The daisy chain of couplings in Hare's rather 
perfunctory modernization of Schnitzler's classic is a joyless cycle 
of users and the used, and it lacks the depths of passion and character 
that infuse the playwright's best works. Unlike the original ``La 
Ronde,'' this adaptation gives off about as much Weltschmerz as the 
lurid neon lighting in which it is bathed. Audiences seeking to recover 
from the frostbite of ``The Blue Room'' might find it at the National 
Theater, the home of Trevor Nunn's triumphant revival of Rodgers and 
Hammerstein's ``Oklahoma!'' In this miraculously fresh-feeling production, 
which moves to the West End in January with (one prays) a Broadway 
engagement to follow, raging hormones may get people into trouble, 
but they are also a source of exuberant, unquenchable life. This sensibility 
matches the robust, pioneer spirit of the show's world of farmers 
and cowboys. The production has been restaged in ways that go beyond 
the usual respectful museum-piece revivals, with vital new choreography 
by Susan Stroman replacing the fabled dance numbers of Agnes de Mille. 
Yet it comes closer than any version I've seen in creating a sense 
of how thrillingly novel the original production must have been. Every 
song, even the chestnut of an opening number, ``Oh, What a Beautiful 
Mornin','' has a feeling of conversational spontaneity. The show, 
populated with largely unknown but vigorously talented actors, seems 
propelled by young sexual urges uncertainly groping for an outlet, 
finding blissful release in dance. The more troubled eroticism of 
the show is given appropriately shadowy life, most notably in Shuler 
Hensley's compellingly brutish Jud. The sexual ambivalence of the 
virginal Laury, reconceived as an overalls-wearing tomboy, registers 
more pointedly than ever. The threat of disruptive violence and the 
possibility of disappointments and losses to come are never far from 
the surface. This acknowledgment of darkness only enhances the energy-charged 
light thrown off by the ensemble. A similar exuberance could be found 
in the Globe Theater's brassy interpretation of ``A Mad World, My 
Masters,'' an early (1605) ribald comedy by Thomas Middleton. The 
Globe has had a huge popular success, and this production makes it 
easy to see why. As directed by Sue Lefton, ``Mad World,'' which concluded 
its run last month, was a gaudy, nonstop roundelay of earthy erotic 
entanglements, full of actorly adrenaline that fed off the rowdy audience. 
The play, whose characters include a courtesan who has sold her virginity 
15 times, is a reminder that a cynical take on sexual foibles is nothing 
new to the British theater and that such cynicism could also be fun. 
Also on hand is a debauchee whose oxymoronic name speaks volumes about 
the English temperament: Penitent Brothel. In the title role of the 
Almeida Theater's production of Racine's ``Phedre,'' directed by Jonathan 
Kent at the Albery Theater, Diana Rigg appears to be possessed by 
a succubus of some sort, and believe you me, she's not happy about 
it. This fiercely intelligent actress creates a stinging portrait 
of a woman whose loins are directly at odds with her fine mind. Desire 
is a cancer, and Ms. Rigg's contorted postures and bitter, enraged 
delivery suggest a pain as much physical as emotional. Overall, the 
evening is too solemnly chic by half, with Maria Bjornson's elegant 
setting and costumes bringing to mind a fashion shoot by Horst. Kent, 
who collaborated with Ms. Rigg on ``Medea,'' is not, to put it mildly, 
a relaxed director. Here, he has his actors flattening themselves 
against the walls to express fear and sprinkling themselves with water 
in vain attempts to cool their characters' passions. The approach 
verges on camp, particularly in Toby Stephens' tremulous, lip-biting 
performance as the unwilling object of Phedre's affection. But Julian 
Glover is first-rate as Theseus, a strutting king whose bluster deflates 
into bewildered grief, and the blistering war against eroticism waged 
by Ms. Rigg's Phedre is unforgettable. The contemporary characters 
in Ravenhill's ``Handbag,'' at the Lyric Studio in Hammersmith, don't 
put up much of a struggle against their carnal appetites. This messy 
but intermittently powerful play juxtaposes two plots: the modern-day 
tale of two couples, one gay and one lesbian, who decide to rear a 
child together and a speculative version of the history of the misplaced 
baby in ``The Importance of Being Earnest.'' Neither the age of repression 
nor that of promiscuity makes good parents. The people in Ravenhill's 
very bleak world are selfish creatures with short attention spans 
and muddled, conflicted notions of what it means to take care of someone 
else. Directed by Nick Philippou, the production has the subtlety 
of a fire-and-brimstone revival meeting. But the six-member cast brings 
a fearless, raw conviction to the evening, and unlike ``The Blue Room,'' 
``Handbag'' locates the sharp pang of emptiness in its terminally 
dissatisfied characters. Even in the midst of vividly simulated sexual 
acts, no one has a good time. The Prince and Princess of Wales, as 
incarnated in the ``Beyond the Fringe''-style antics of ``Love Upon 
the Throne,'' don't get much pleasure out of life, either. England's 
most closely watched example of marital infidelity in recent years 
is rendered as a tale told by idiots, two bumblers of high aspirations 
and modest talent, named Desmond Oliver Dingle and Raymond Box (the 
alter egos of Barlow and Ramm). But while they tend to get crucial 
details like the names of the royal family hilariously wrong, this 
hapless pair somehow gets the sad core of Charles and Diana's ill-starred 
relationship right. Beneath the farcical high jinks, there's a current 
of wistfulness about one couple's inability to connect that taps into 
what made this royal marriage such a gripping and disturbing soap 
opera. For the record, although a bed scene between Diana and one 
of her lovers is promised, it never actually takes place. When Raymond 
Box learns the scene has been cut, he lets out a cyclonic sigh of 
relief. After more than a week of coital theater in London, I fully 
shared his feelings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>