<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0119 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the global economic crisis spreads across much of the developing 
world, the World Bank fears that the Group of Seven major industrial 
powers wants to transform it from a slow-moving development agency 
into a financial fire truck, programmed to squirt streams of cash 
at countries under speculative attack as part of a plan to create 
a large financing mechanism capable of combating the global turmoil. 
Meanwhile, the International Monetary Fund, which was expressly created 
to perform the job of emergency financial rescue, is in danger of 
becoming sidelined in the present emergency. After advancing huge 
loans to Asia and Russia, it has only enough cash left for one more 
big rescue operation unless the U.S. Congress overcomes its hostility 
to giving it new funds. ``What I've been trying to do recently is 
to convince my shareholders that they shouldn't think of the bank 
as a second-level IMF,'' the World Bank's president, James Wolfensohn, 
said last week at a news conference, stressing that his duty is to 
promote sound long-term development. ``We are not that; we are not 
a lender of last resort or a liquidity funder.'' As finance ministers 
from all over the world gathered here this weekend in preparation 
for next week's annual joint meeting of the World Bank and the IMF, 
many warned that without a radical strengthening of the international 
financial system the crisis will spread far beyond Asia and Russia 
to affect the whole developing world. ``Recession will be at the door 
of all countries unless we react quickly,'' Algeria's finance minister, 
Abdelkrim Harchaoui, said on Saturday after serving as chairman of 
a meeting of the Group of 24, which represents the developing world. 
India's finance minister, Yashwant Sinha, said, ``We're witnessing 
an unprecedented crisis, with whole regions engulfed, not just countries. 
It's a global challenge.'' The IMF has sharply lowered its economic 
growth forecasts for the developing world as a whole, predicting now 
that its economies will expand by 2.3 percent this year and 3.6 percent 
next. That compares with last year's 5.8 percent rate. The four most 
seriously affected Asian countries _ Indonesia, Malaysia, Korea and 
the Philippines _ are much the worst hit. Together they face a 10.4 
percent decline in economic output this year and another smaller contraction 
next year. Hopes of economic growth in Russia and the rest of the 
former Soviet Union have also been dashed, with the IMF now expecting 
a decline overall and a sharp 6 percent fall in Russian output this 
year and next combined. Under difficult international conditions, 
what the World Bank now fears is that the United States and other 
members of the Group of Seven will push it into contributing to the 
plan they endorsed Saturday for creating a big new pool of money to 
combat the global crisis. This would involve asking the World Bank 
to relax its usual lending standards and to join the IMF in making 
new quick-dispersing loans to countries in trouble that would be little 
more than cash injections rather than a serious contribution to their 
long-term development. At a news conference Sunday, the British chancellor 
of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, was ambiguous about the World Bank's 
role in the present crisis, saying the Group of Seven wanted ``to 
stress the World Bank's long-term role in promoting structural reforms'' 
but adding that it must still ``take a role in crisis management.'' 
In the back of everyone's mind is Brazil, which has been in danger 
of speculative attack for some time and is informally discussing a 
possible big new loan of about $30 billion with international aid 
agencies and Western governments once this weekend's elections are 
out of the way. The World Bank is vulnerable to pressure to become 
more of a short-term financing agency for countries in distress because, 
unlike the IMF, it is relatively flush with cash at the moment. With 
a lending capacity of some $160 billion and about $104 billion in 
outstanding loans and pledges, it could in theory lend an additional 
$50 billion or so. ``When Larry sees those figures,'' a senior World 
Bank official said, referring to Lawrence Summers, the U.S. undersecretary 
of the Treasury, ``he says to himself, `Here's another $50 billion 
to throw at the crisis.''' World Bank officials say they are ready 
to play some financial fire-fighting role. But they do not want to 
endanger their reputation as a first-class borrower on international 
financial markets by raising annual net lending above $11 billion, 
from about $8 billion last year. And they insist that any extra loans 
should meet their traditional lending conditions and be destined for 
sound long-term projects intended to fight poverty and to promote 
development goals like education, health and environmental protection. 
The IMF, meanwhile, has the potential to play an enhanced role, as 
the Group of Seven called on it to do on Saturday, since member governments 
have agreed to give it $90 billion more of their national currencies, 
of which about $60 billion would be paid in desirable currencies that 
crisis-stricken countries would want to borrow. In addition, they 
want to expand a special overdraft fund known as the General Arrangements 
to Borrow by a further $22 billion, thus giving the IMF a total of 
nearly $90 billion in extra money to lend. But the actual provision 
of this cash remains stalled by the refusal of Congress to approve 
the United States' contribution. Until Congress gives its assent, 
the IMF has only about $26 billion of usable currencies left in its 
coffers and $16.5 billion more in the special overdraft fund. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>