<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0045 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After years of trying to turn around the company's Blockbuster video-rental 
unit, the chairman of Viacom Inc., Sumner Redstone, seemed finally 
to be on the right track. Viacom's shares had been weathering the 
recent stock-market turbulence, largely on word that Blockbuster was 
bringing customers back into its stores in record numbers. Then last 
Tuesday, in a matter of hours, it looked as if Redstone's well-laid 
Blockbuster plan was about to go bust. Early that morning, two Wall 
Street analysts reduced their third-quarter earnings forecast for 
Viacom. Blockbuster was spending so much to keep customers happy by 
keeping shelves stocked with the biggest hit films, the analysts warned, 
that Viacom's profits were bound to suffer. Within hours after Tuesday's 
opening bell on the New York Stock Exchange, Viacom shares were down 
16.6 percent on the American Stock Exchange. So Redstone, who was 
in Los Angeles and planning to head to Boston, directed the pilot 
of his Gulfstream III jet instead to streak back to New York, where 
Viacom has its headquarters. Throughout the five-hour flight, he worked 
the air phone at 20,000 feet, assuring institutional investors and 
heads of the major funds that hold Viacom shares that ``all of our 
businesses are meeting or exceeding expectations,'' as he repeatedly 
put it. By the time the market closed, Redstone was back at his Manhattan 
office. And his damage control had helped the stock recover part of 
its loss, closing at $56.75, down 10.8 percent on the day. But despite 
Redstone's high-altitude salesmanship, the crisis is hardly over. 
The stock closed Friday at $56.5625. Early next year, Viacom hopes 
to spin off 20 percent of Blockbuster to the public, the first part 
of a two-part strategy in which Redstone intends to separate the rest 
of Blockbuster from Viacom through a spinoff, sale or stock swap. 
The whole process is intended to let investors track Blockbuster separately 
from the rest of Viacom, whose stock-market value is being held down 
by the video operation, analysts say. An initial offering would raise 
money for Viacom and put a de facto market value for the other 80 
percent of Blockbuster. That could set the stage for the second step 
_ either a tax-free spinoff to shareholders or perhaps even a sale 
of the rest of the video unit. But last Tuesday's battering of Viacom's 
stock indicated that analysts and investors are leery of any move 
that could affect the share price. ``Marketing and promotion costs 
are hurting near-term earnings more than expected,'' said Jessica 
Reif Cohen, a Merrill Lynch analyst, one of the people whose revised 
third-quarter cash-flow estimates forced the Viacom chairman to change 
his flight plan. ``Hopefully,'' Ms. Cohen said in an interview, ``this 
is a one-time investment.'' But, warned Harold Vogel, a media analyst 
at Cowen &AMP; Co., if marketing costs continue to reduce profit margins 
in the future, he questions whether ``slower growth at Blockbuster 
will depress the valuation received for an IPO.'' But Redstone dismisses 
such critics, just as he has long scorned soothsayers who have contended 
that interactive television and digital cable would render the video-rental 
business obsolete. ``We are intent on increasing our market share,'' 
he said of the Blockbuster marketing blitz. ``Last year 17 million 
VCRs were sold,'' Redstone pointed out. ``The year before they sold 
18 million, and people are not using them to wash clothes.'' Certainly 
Viacom remains strong in its core businesses: the MTV, Nickelodeon 
and VH1 cable networks, and the Paramount film and television studios. 
The film business, in particular, has had a standout year at the box 
office with ``The Truman Story''; ``Titanic,'' a co-production with 
News Corp.'s 20th Century Fox, and ``Saving Private Ryan'' and ``Deep 
Impact,'' both co-productions with Dreamworks SKG. But Blockbuster 
has long been seen as an albatross, almost from the moment Viacom 
paid $5.5 billion for it in 1994 as a way to generate the large cash 
flow to help finance its $10 billion purchase of Paramount Communications. 
It was widely considered a quick fix for Viacom, but one that would 
not last long as the advent of interactive digital cable television 
systems sent rental videos the way of the Victrola. Digital cable 
remains somewhere in the future, though, and Blockbuster's problem 
turned out to be less one of demand and more one of supply. Under 
the time-honored operating strategy, Blockbuster would buy tapes from 
the studios for $65 each and recover the cost and make any profits 
from the rental fees. The company kept all the proceeds, but the high 
purchase price for each tape meant a limited rental inventory _ and 
dissatisfied customers. But earlier this year, Redstone and Blockbuster's 
new chief executive, John Antioco, came up with a plan in which the 
home video chain would buy tapes from film companies for $7 a cassette 
or less and then split the rental revenues with the studios. ``What 
drives the plan,'' Antioco said in a telephone interview, ``is that 
the customer is doing better. You can pretty much go into a store 
and get anything you want.'' The results from this ``Satisfaction 
Guaranteed'' campaign are already evident. In the second quarter of 
1998, which ended on June 30, same-store sales improved more than 
12.8 percent from those in the quarter a year earlier. And for 1998, 
Blockbuster could account for $550 million, or more than 25 percent, 
of the company's $2 billion in cash flow _ earnings before interest, 
taxes depreciation and amortization _ on revenues of $12 billion, 
according to estimates by Ms. Cohen of Merrill Lynch. Last year, Blockbuster 
generated only about $425 million, Ms. Cohen estimates. But the reduced 
earnings forecast last Tuesday by Ms. Cohen and Alan Kassan of Deutsche 
Bank Securities took note that Blockbuster is spending aggressively 
to advertise and promote its customer satisfaction campaign. ``Investors 
have seen Blockbuster's rebound through rose-colored glasses,'' said 
Vogel, the Cowen &AMP; Co. analyst, ``not realizing there is a cost 
attached to gaining market share.'' But ``in the long run, it is the 
right thing to do,'' he said, particularly if Viacom is dressing up 
Blockbuster for a spinoff or sale. It is no secret that Viacom has 
wanted to spin off or sell Blockbuster. But tax rules dictate that 
an acquirer must retain ownership of an acquired company for at least 
five years before divesting it in any type of tax-free transaction. 
So it has been to the advantage of Redstone, the largest Viacom shareholder, 
with 67 percent of the voting stock, to wait until September 1999 
to make such a move with Blockbuster. But the initial offering for 
20 percent could come at any time, and Redstone is hoping for early 
next year. So the question for Redstone's critics is not so much ``When?'' 
but ``At what cost?'' Blockbuster's promotional costs will presumably 
drop, but no one can yet say by how much. And though the new strategy 
lets Blockbuster stores carry a larger inventory of hits, one film 
company executive, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that 
making it easier for customers to rent the most popular mass-market 
movies could reduce the demand for niche films _ and make it harder 
for studios to recover the costs of making those pictures, which are 
often still in the red before being released on video. To that criticism, 
Antioco offers a counterargument: On an independent or art film, where 
he used to worry about taking the risk of spending $65 for a tape 
that might not cover its costs in rentals, he can now afford to take 
a chance. Redstone, for his part, says that nothing so far in the 
stock market _ not last Tuesday's selloff of Viacom, not the general 
paralysis in the initial-offering market that last week claimed Goldman, 
Sachs as its latest victim _ need deter him from a Blockbuster stock 
offering. ``We are doing very well,'' Redstone said. ``And we have 
very little exposure in Asia,'' he added, referring to that region's 
economic woes. The best measure of his confidence may be that, as 
Viacom has told analysts, the company is buying back a series of stock 
warrants, trading at $4 a share, that will expire worthless unless 
the stock price exceeds $70 a share next July. ``If Viacom thought 
the stock would be down next July,'' Ms. Cohen said, ``then they wouldn't 
need to buy them in.'' To some analysts, Redstone's optimism is worrisome 
because it has prompted overbullish expectations on the part of Wall 
Street before. Some of that optimism may be justified. The pending 
$4.3 billion sale of the Simon &AMP; Schuster book publishing unit 
to Pearson PLC will help the company cut debt to $4 billion next year 
from $10 billion in 1996. ``Their balance sheet is very strong,'' 
said David Londoner, an analyst who follows the company for Schroder 
Inc. Meanwhile, under the Viacom Entertainment unit's chairman, Jonathan 
Dolgin, and Sherry Lansing, who reports to him as chairman of the 
motion picture group, the movie business has curtailed its release 
schedule from more than 20 films a year to an annual rate of about 
16, below the industry average. Dolgin noted that the competition 
among releases of big-budget films had grown so heated that he thought 
a more limited release schedule would help the company focus on the 
movies that count most. Elsewhere in Dolgin's entertainment division, 
the biggest challenge is getting the fledgling UPN broadcast network 
on track. In an era where the major television networks increasingly 
want to own the series they produce, Viacom needs a viable network 
of its own to showcase some of its Paramount television series, like 
``The Watcher.'' After a rocky debut for UPN in 1995, featuring ill-fated 
experiments that failed to attract many advertisers to the network, 
its new head, Dean Valentine, is using shows like ``Legacy,'' a multigenerational 
period drama, to seek a broader middle-class audience for UPN and 
to differentiate it from the increasingly narrowly targeted broadcast 
networks like Time Warner's WB, which focuses on a younger audience. 
Viacom's mainstay, meanwhile, is its cable networks. MTV, Nickelodeon 
and VH1 continue to drive the company, providing roughly half its 
operating cash flow. Yet, future growth for MTV and Nickelodeon will 
be hard to maintain as those networks reach saturation among cable 
households with teen-agers and younger children. Ms. Cohen estimates 
that cash-flow growth at the cable networks will drop to about 14 
percent in 1999 from 18 percent this year. That makes the outlook 
for Viacom's other divisions more crucial than it might be otherwise. 
Investors might not care quite as much about Blockbuster's future 
if they thought that Redstone, who is 74, would sell all of Viacom 
in the near future so that shareholders could realize a premium on 
the stock. But such a sale is unlikely. The stock is held in trust, 
Redstone said, ``first for my wife during her lifetime, and then it 
goes to the kids and the grandchildren.'' And as long as he is around, 
Redstone apparently has no intention of passing the baton. ``While 
I would listen to offers,'' he said, ``my strong inclinations would 
be against selling.'' Which means that the only Viacom asset likely 
to be in play any time soon is part, or perhaps all, of Blockbuster. 
And as Redstone learned last Tuesday at 20,000 feet, investors will 
be watching his every move. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>