<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was another step forward, and perhaps a wave goodbye to a negative 
history that is fading fast. The Jets, who had not known since 1993 
what it was to stop Dan Marino, played a remarkable game Sunday in 
producing a 20-9 victory over the previously unbeaten Dolphins. They 
battered Marino after his running game failed. And they outmaneuvered 
the league's second-stingiest defense with a clever rushing and passing 
offense as Vinny Testaverde chased at least one demon out of his erratic 
past. Even the old pro, Keith Byars, 10 days shy of his 35th birthday, 
was cavorting as he led all receivers with six receptions for 71 yards 
to set a National Football League career record for passes caught 
by a running back with 593. The Jets came in sky-high, after reaching 
a peak on the practice field last Thursday. It is a team that desperately 
needed Sunday's victory and is now 2-2 with a second straight triumph, 
while remaining undefeated in division play. Of course, Coach Bill 
Parcells read the riot act to the Jets after such a display. Parcells 
told his players that he was angry at the way some of them committed 
dumb penalties or performed in ways that showed they were not thinking 
_ such as Curtis Martin inadvertently running out of bounds to stop 
the clock in the final minute, while the Jets were trying to keep 
it going. It seemed almost not to matter that Martin generated a second 
straight powerful performance _ 36 carries for 108 yards and his first 
touchdown as a Jet. And Parcells warned the Jets that the St. Louis 
Rams, whom the Jets face next Sunday, have been waiting, have been 
resting during a bye week _ and if the Jets think they are anybody 
special, they had better start proving it next week. ``Now Coach Parcells 
was saying, `how far can we go?''' said linebacker Pepper Johnson, 
a veteran of the coach's years with the Giants. ``Are we burning up 
our energy, or can we keep it going to St. Louis?'' Johnson often 
smiled as he thought of the Parcells way of keeping a team on edge. 
But Sunday, at any rate, the Jets were mostly smart, and good, and 
often cute. They allowed Karim Abdul-Jabbar only 16 yards on nine 
runs for a 1.8-yard per carry average. And the great Marino? He was 
stumped. Oh, he had one fine drive toward the end of the game that 
led to a touchdown. That took the Jets' edge down to 17-9. But it 
was more a stroll down memory lane, because the Dolphins of 1998 insist 
on running the ball. When was the last time anyone saw Marino hand 
the ball off three straight times in the third quarter with his team 
trailing? This was what he was ordered to do, when the Dolphins could 
get the signals straight. They had been bothered throughout the game 
with a faulty communications system in which the coaches on the sideline 
could not communicate directly with the quarterback through his headset. 
So the Dolphins had to shuttle players in and out, often using the 
important receiver, O.J. McDuffie. Thus, he was not always available. 
Marino was held to only 13 completions in 31 attempts for 121 yards. 
He was sacked three times. He was intercepted twice. These sorts of 
things rarely happen to him, at least not at the hands of the Jets. 
He had beaten them seven straight times going back to the 1994 season. 
He had never before had such a poor completion percentage against 
them. Meanwhile, there is Testaverde. He would not comment on starting 
again in place of Glenn Foley, saying, ``I don't want to be a thorn 
in anyone's side,'' but would dearly love to remain the starting quarterback. 
Parcells was his usual noncommittal self. ``Nothing has changed,'' 
he said, when asked whether Foley, who may or may not be still nursing 
sore ribs, can return at starting quarterback. After consecutive clutch 
victories, however, it would be hard to imagine Testaverde going to 
the bench. Testaverde has been a Jet only for this season, but he 
has his own baggage. ``I'm just glad finally to get the tag off me 
that I can't beat Jimmy Johnson; I was 0-3 against his teams,'' said 
the quarterback, who played college ball for Johnson at the University 
of Miami. The Jets' defense, meanwhile, was tough Sunday. Miami had 
not trailed in the second half this season. It had put games away 
by averaging almost 12 points in the second quarter. But after Olindo 
Mare had given the Dolphins a 3-0 first-quarter lead on a 46-yard 
field goal, the Dolphins got no more points until Marino's late drive 
was capped by a 2-yard scoring pass to tight end Troy Drayton. In 
between, it was all Jets, offensively and defensively. Keyshawn Johnson 
produced his fifth touchdown of the season _ he is now at a Jerry 
Rice rate _ by snaring a 10-yard Testaverde pass in the second quarter. 
It was a play that Testaverde and Johnson had worked on after practice 
all week _ Testaverde tossing it deep into the end zone, over a defender. 
This time he did it over Dolphins cornerback Terrell Buckley. John 
Hall followed that later in the period with a 47-yard field goal for 
a 10-3 lead. The drive that led to the field goal remained alive after 
it had apparently been ended by an interception by Miami's Brian Walker. 
But the Dolphins' Patrick Surtain was called for interference on the 
play. In the third quarter, strong safety Victor Green picked off 
a Marino pass that positioned Martin's 6-yard touchdown run for a 
17-3 lead. That marked the first time this season that a Miami turnover 
had been converted into a touchdown by the opposition and it offset 
Drayton's touchdown. Hall's fourth-quarter 25-yard field goal with 
48 seconds left clinched the victory. This final score was one of 
the most enjoyable for the third-largest home crowd in Jets' history 
_ 75,257. It followed a drive that began when Testaverde, on his 25, 
was looking for Martin. As the quarterback set to throw, someone grabbed 
Testaverde's right arm. So he flipped the ball with his left, the 
shovel pass to Martin went 13 yards, complete, and the Jets were on 
their way. ``I didn't expect this to happen,'' Testaverde said of 
starting the last two games. Asked how he would feel if this were 
taken away from him, he didn't want to think about that. ``I'm having 
too much fun,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>