<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although they may laugh along when outsiders poke fun at their hometown, 
people here feel a deep affection for this neighborly, unpretentious 
Hudson River city, once home to companies as prosaically American 
as Smith Brothers cough drops. That's why John Chickery, whose family 
has operated an office furniture store on the city's ragtag Main Street 
for 22 years, was annoyed on a trip last month to Las Vegas to hear 
a stranger say: ``You made the big time. You've got a mass murderer.'' 
News had evidently traveled across the continent that eight prostitutes 
who had vanished over the last two years were found last month inside 
a ramshackle house less than two blocks from this area's premier institution, 
Vassar College. And that discovery came little more than a month after 
a verdict wrapped up another national story that clouded Poughkeepsie's 
image: the racially loaded defamation trial stemming from accusations 
in 1988 by a black girl, Tawana Brawley, that she had been kidnapped 
and raped by a gang of white men, charges that a grand jury had found 
to be completely fictitious. ``First we're a racist town; now we're 
a town of mass murder,'' is the way Chickery's capsulized this city's 
frustration. Still, people here are sensitive to the fact that the 
back-to-back episodes have exposed some of Poughkeepsie's less flattering 
sides, the effects of the tailspin that Poughkeepsie has been in since 
it began losing jobs and residents in the 1950s. This once-storied 
place to raise a family _ New York City Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew, 
the son of an IBM security guard, grew up here _ has grown accustomed 
to violent crime, drugs, prostitution and the kind of suspiciousness 
that sometimes manifests as racial friction. Even the mayor of this 
city of 29,000, Colette Lafuente, acknowledges that Poughkeepsie can 
be seen as a poster child for all the government and commercial schemes 
of the 1960s and 1970s that produced unintended and often damaging 
consequences. Travel through the city was made easier by the building 
of crisscrossing highways, but the roads chopped the city into quarters 
and wounded some vibrant neighborhoods. The highways also made it 
easier for manufacturers to locate outside town, where land was cheaper. 
And they made it possible to shop in massive malls rising along Route 
9, killing thriving downtown department and apparel stores like Luckey 
Platt, Up to Date and M. Schwartz and Co. With powerful patrons like 
Rep. Hamilton Fish Jr., the city became one of the nation's largest 
per-capita recipients of federal aid. But the aid was a mixed blessing. 
Swaths of charming 19th century houses and commercial buildings were 
leveled by urban renewal, replaced in some cases by ugly parking lots 
and bland public housing, according to a study by Harvey Flad, a Vassar 
professor of geography. Meanwhile, the state was releasing thousands 
of patients from psychiatric hospitals, like the Hudson River Psychiatric 
Center here. Scores wound up homeless in downtown, where they scared 
off many remaining shoppers. As a result of this cascade of policy 
debacles, Poughkeepsie has a threadbare statistical profile that is 
best crystallized by one fact: This city midway between Manhattan 
and Albany does not have a single supermarket. The population here 
has declined by almost a third from a 1950 high of 41,023. Of those 
remaining, three of every 10 never graduated high school. The average 
family makes $34,706 a year and in all Poughkeepsie, only 111 families 
earn more than $150,000 annually. Unemployment is about 6 percent 
in a city that once had giant plants for printing, farm equipment 
and machine parts. Over the years, the city's jobless rate has hovered 
close to twice that of surrounding Dutchess County, said Dr. Ann Davis, 
an economics professor at Poughkeepsie's Marist College. The final 
blow came in the early 1990s when IBM, which had practically turned 
the Poughkeepsie area into a company town, furloughed 7,700 workers 
in its three Hudson Valley plants, leaving 13,800 workers still employed. 
Now, the city's largest employer is the Dutchess County government. 
Few people here blame Poughkeepsie for this year's unwelcome events. 
When Tawana Brawley told her racially fraught story 10 years ago, 
she was living in Wappingers Falls, a village south of Poughkeepsie. 
Yet Stephen Pagones, the former prosecutor who accused Ms. Brawley 
and three of her advisers of defaming him, brought his suit at the 
Dutchess County Courthouse in the city's heart. And news conferences 
staged here by the Rev. Al Sharpton and Miss Brawley's two other advisers 
who were defendants in the case drew attention to regional race relations. 
The eight slain prostitutes were found in a house just across the 
city border in a township that is also called Poughkeepsie. Yet, because 
most of the prostitutes worked a seedy stretch of the city's Main 
Street, the incident highlighted the city's attraction for poor urban 
and rural women looking for fast money or drugs. But Patricia Barone, 
mother of Gina Barone, one of the victims, does not blame the city's 
drug and prostitution problems for her daughter's death. ``It's unfortunate 
that Kendall Francois had to pick Poughkeepsie to live in,'' said 
Mrs. Barone, referring to the linebacker-sized suspect in whose house 
the victims were found. ``Poughkeepsie is a lovely little city really 
trying to pull itself up.'' Poughkeepsie has never taken offense when 
outsiders ridiculed its small-town, inelegant name. The city, whose 
name derives from a Wappinger Indian mouthful that means ``reed-covered 
lodge by the little water place,'' was settled in 1687 by two Dutchmen. 
By the late 19th century, Poughkeepsie, with new railroad connections, 
was a bustling manufacturing city. Proud city fathers like Matthew 
Vassar, who made his fortune as a brewer here, enhanced the city with 
their generosity. Vassar founded a women's college intended to rival 
Harvard in 1861. The prosperity lingered until mid-century, with employers 
like the Smith Brothers' plant, Schatz Federal Bearings, which made 
the ball bearings used in military gun turrets, and Western Printing 
and Lithography, which printed Golden Books for children. But the 
decline of American manufacturing transformed Poughkeepsie just as 
it transformed other river cities like Beacon, Newburgh, and Kingston. 
Many white working-class people left the city, said Norman Fainstein, 
Vassar's dean of faculty and an urban sociologist. The long-rooted 
black community and the newer black migrants from the South generally 
stayed put. Today almost a third of the city's residents are black 
with a small but growing number of Mexican immigrants. Though some 
Poughkeepsians believe the small scale of the city makes for cordial 
contacts across racial lines, Barbara Jeter Jackson, one of two blacks 
on the eight-member legislative Common Council, is disturbed that 
there are so few black workers on the city's work force. Poughkeepsie's 
story today is practically a tale of three cities _ a partly industrial 
south side, a still genteel north side and a patchwork downtown that 
is graced with isolated jewels like the Roosevelt-era post office 
and the Bardovan Theater. A visitor to a three-block pedestrian mall 
on Main Street can find an anachronistic gem like Mary H. Abdoo's 
bridal shop, where for 47 years customers from all over the Northeast 
have tried on wedding dresses amid rose plush drapery and wrought-iron 
seats. But the Main Street pedestrian mall, where traffic was blocked 
off on the misguided notion that it would make shopping more convenient, 
is now marked by empty storefronts. Mayor Lafuente has made a revival 
of Poughkeepsie's largely abandoned waterfront, with parks, shops 
and restaurants, the centerpiece of her restoration plans. That will 
require a mix of government and private funds. She also wants to reopen 
the Main Street pedestrian mall to traffic. Giving a reporter a city 
tour, she pointed out dozens of tumbledown buildings slated for renovation, 
including a downtown row of 20 Queen Anne-style houses and nearby 
storefronts that will be restored, with government financing. Like 
other Poughkeepsians, Police Chief Ronald Knapp appears defensive 
about the city's recent image problems. The discovery of the slain 
prostitutes, he said, came after his department reduced the number 
of murders from six in 1996 to one this year, with officers beginning 
to focus on such matters as rowdy college parties. ``In 1996, people 
were screaming about homicides and shootings,'' he said. ``Now they're 
screaming about parking violations and college parties. Doesn't that 
say something?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>