<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Supreme Court term that opens Monday has the potential to produce 
significant rulings in such areas as civil rights and federal regulation, 
with a mix of constitutional and statutory cases on a docket that 
is still very much a work in progress. The court's calendar is also 
a mix of old and new: The justices will revisit the familiar issues 
of sexual harassment and redistricting, while also undertaking their 
first review of the 1996 law that was intended to increase competition 
in the telecommunications industry. In a case of immediate practical 
importance, the court has scheduled an expedited argument next month 
on whether the Census Bureau can proceed with its plan to adjust for 
the expected undercount in the 2000 census by using statistical sampling. 
A special three-judge U.S. District Court here ruled on Aug. 24 that 
sampling was barred by federal law, leaving plans for the census in 
doubt until the Supreme Court resolves the issue. The court has 45 
cases on its docket for decision, roughly half the number it will 
decide by the time the term ends late next June. A few of the cases 
waiting in pipeline could, if granted during the next few months, 
convert an already interesting term to one of extremely high visibility. 
Among these is the Clinton administration's appeal of a ruling in 
July that the attorney-client privilege does not shield communications 
between the president and White House lawyers (Office of the President 
vs. Office of Independent Counsel, No. 98-316). Also awaiting the 
court's review, but not yet granted, is a constitutional challenge 
to a school voucher program in Wisconsin, upheld by that state's Supreme 
Court, that permits the use of vouchers for parochial school tuition 
(Jackson vs. Benson, No. 98-376). Another of the pending appeals, 
a campaign finance case from Cincinnati, could provide the justices 
with a vehicle for re-examining the court's precedents equating campaign 
spending with free speech. In this case, City of Cincinnati vs. Kruse, 
No. 98-454, the city is defending limits on expenditures for City 
Council elections. A U.S. Appeals Court invalidated the $140,000 spending 
limit on the basis of the Supreme Court's 1976 ruling in Buckley vs. 
Valeo. Cincinnati is arguing that unlimited campaign spending has 
been so damaging to the country that the justices should revisit their 
1976 precedent that found spending limits to violate the First Amendment. 
Of the cases the court has already accepted, the census sampling case 
could have the most immediate impact _ but then again, it may not. 
One question is whether the House of Representatives, where the Republican 
majority opposes the use of sampling techniques, had standing to bring 
the lawsuit in the absence of any concrete, institutional injury to 
itself. The administration is arguing in its appeal, Department of 
Commerce vs. U.S. House of Representatives, No. 98-404, that the suit 
should have been dismissed, noting that no matter how the census is 
conducted, the House of Representatives will still consist of 435 
members and will still exercise the same constitutional powers. The 
stated aim of the sampling effort is to adjust for the several million 
people the census will predictably miss, as the last one did, if it 
counts heads in the traditional manner. The heated politics around 
the issue reflects the fact that the undercount is not neutral; members 
of minority groups and poor people living in cities are missed most 
often and, consequently, the predominantly Democratic areas where 
these people live would benefit the most if they were accounted for. 
Beyond the census issue, another of the court's cases could affect 
the next round of reapportionment. For the third time in five years, 
the court will review a congressional districting case from North 
Carolina. The justices invalidated, as an unconstitutional racial 
gerrymander, the state's earlier effort to comply with the Voting 
Rights Act by creating an irregularly shaped, majority-black district. 
Now, the 12th Congressional District has another new shape, somewhat 
more compact and with a slight majority of white voters. The question 
in Hunt vs. Cromartie, No. 98-85, is whether the district is still 
invalid, as a special panel of three federal judges ruled last spring. 
The court's answer could determine the extent to which legislators 
can take race into account in drawing new district lines after the 
next census. In its last term, the court ruled in four sexual harassment 
cases, one of which, Gebser vs. Lago Vista Independent School District, 
concerned harassment by teachers of students. The court ruled that 
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which prohibits sex 
discrimination in school programs that receive federal money, made 
school districts liable for harassment by teachers if it could be 
shown that school officials knew of the problem and refused to intervene. 
The new case, Davis vs. Monroe County Board of Education, No. 97-843, 
presents the question of a school district's liability for harassment 
of a student by another student. The federal appeals court in Atlanta 
ruled last year that Title IX did not apply to the situation. The 
Supreme Court appeal was filed by a woman whose daughter was harassed 
for months by a boy in her fifth-grade classroom in Macon, Ga., where 
school officials refused to take action despite repeated complaints. 
In another civil rights case, the court will decide whether collective 
bargaining agreements that provide for arbitration of disputes bar 
individual lawsuits against an employer for discrimination on the 
basis of race, sex, age or disability. Most labor agreements these 
days contain arbitration clauses, and there has been widespread dispute 
in the lower courts over whether these apply only to workplace issues 
arising under the contract, or whether the clauses also bar access 
to federal court by employees seeking to vindicate their rights under 
federal civil rights law. This closely watched case is Wright vs. 
Universal Maritime Services Corp., No. 97-889. While the sexual harassment 
and arbitration cases present statutory questions, the court also 
has some important constitutional cases that raise civil rights issues. 
The justices will review a Chicago anti-loitering ordinance under 
which the police can arrest people they suspect of being gang members, 
and who refuse an order to move along after being seen lingering with 
another person ``with no apparent purpose'' in a public place. The 
Illinois Supreme Court last year struck down the law, under which 
the police had made some 43,000 arrests in three years, on the ground 
that it was impermissibly vague and imposed arbitrary restrictions 
on individual liberty. Anti-loitering laws were common before the 
court struck down several of them in the 1970s, and this case, Chicago 
vs. Morales, No. 97-1121, is being watched closely to see whether 
the court adheres to those precedents. A welfare case from California 
also implicates the court's precedents, raising the question of whether 
states can discriminate against newcomers in the distribution of benefits. 
In 1996, Congress authorized states to reduce welfare benefits for 
new residents. The federal appeals court in San Francisco blocked 
California from putting into effect its two-tiered welfare policy, 
under which new residents are held for the first 12 months to the 
benefits they would have received in their home states. In a 1969 
decision, Shapiro vs. Thompson, the Supreme Court ruled that it violated 
the constitutional right to travel for states to deny all welfare 
benefits to newcomers. A question in the new case, Anderson vs. Roe, 
No. 98-97, is how that precedent applies to a reduction rather than 
elimination of benefits. Finally, the case with the highest economic 
stakes may be the court's review of an appeals court decision last 
year that sharply limited the federal government's role in opening 
up the $100 billion market for local telephone service under the Telecommunications 
Act of 1996. There are a number of separate questions in AT&AMP;T 
vs. Iowa Utilities Board, No. 97-826, which is actually a group of 
eight cases with so many parties and such complex regulatory issues 
that the court has scheduled an unusual two hours, instead of one, 
for argument on Oct. 13. A basic issue is the allocation of regulatory 
authority, in making important pricing decisions under the 1996 law, 
between the Federal Communications Commission and state regulators. 
Would-be entrants into the market for local service are on the government's 
side, while the incumbent local carriers are on the side of the states. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>