<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0084 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bell Atlantic had a problem. A big corporate client in New Jersey 
was convinced that there were problems with a new network that Bell 
Atlantic had built for it. Bell Atlantic knew it could slove the perceived 
problems, but simply could not spare enough engineers with the right 
technical skills to set things straight. So the big telephone company 
did something that once might have been unthinkable for a bearer of 
the Bell legacy: It sought outside help. ``We looked for a resource 
that could come in with the specific network and trouble-shooting 
characteristics so they could work on the team,'' recalled Evelyn 
Howe, director for business development at Bell Atlantic's data networking 
group. The ``resource'' Bell Atlantic turned to back in the winter 
of 1996 was International Network Services Inc., a small company based 
in Sunnyvale, Calif., that is in the vanguard of a new industry: dedicated 
network consulting. INS, founded in 1991, does not manufacture equipment. 
It does not run computers. It does not re-engineer business processes. 
It does not develop corporate strategies. What INS does do is design, 
manage and secure communications networks. And the company does it 
so well that it has become the network engineers' engineer _ the expert 
that the network experts can turn to when they need a specialist's 
touch. Besides Bell Atlantic, among the other telecommunications and 
technology giants that have used INS are AT&AMP;T, MCI Communications, 
Worldcom, SBC Communications, Sprint, BellSouth, Cable &AMP; Wireless, 
Airtouch, GTE, Cisco Systems, Compaq Computer and Oracle. In its narrow 
focus on network services, INS may be unique among public companies, 
and for that it has been rewarded. It is true that the company's stock 
has been slammed during the recent wave of concern about global spending 
on communications networks, closing Friday in Nasdaq trading at $34.375, 
down more than 37 percent from a high of $47.125 in July. Even so, 
INS' stock price is still up 48.7 percent for the year. And unlike 
many Silicon Valley start-ups, INS makes money. The stock trades at 
nearly 49 times estimated per-share earnings, a reflection of the 
company's explosive revenue growth, to $170 million in the fiscal 
year ended in June from $16 million in fiscal 1995. The market opportunity 
is huge. The Yankee Group, a consulting and research firm in Boston, 
estimates that the overall market for network integration services 
will grow to $52.7 billion in 2001 from $29.6 billion last year. Most 
of those services today are provided by companies which generally 
focus on doing something else, like selling equipment or managing 
computer rooms. Karl Keirstead, who follows INS for Lehman Brothers, 
has a highly plausible theory on the evolution of consulting markets, 
and his notion helps put INS into context. The way Keirstead puts 
it, corporate executives have generally been reluctant to involve 
outsiders in the deployment and management of new technologies until 
a big company validates the idea that outsourcing is viable. Such 
validation is what Electronic Data Systems brought to computer services 
business in the 1960s and what Andersen Consulting helped bring to 
software services in the 1980s. Network services are the next stage 
in outsourcing. The validation, at least in the eyes of the largest 
corporations, is being performed by outsourcing operations like AT&AMP;T 
Solutions, IBM Global Services and Bell Atlantic Network Integration. 
Now independent companies like INS can reap the benefits. ``The goliaths 
are now looking to the INS' for help in delivering on these contracts,'' 
Keirstead said. And as put by Howard Anderson, the Yankee Group's 
managing director, corporate technology managers are trying to add 
technical expertise without adding full-time employees. But INS does 
more than perform subcontracting work for brand-name telecommunications 
carriers. Ascend Communications, a data network equipment maker, has 
used INS engineers to help deploy Ascend-based networks that include 
equipment from other companies. And Mastercard International hired 
INS to help Mastercard move its headquarters to Purchase, N.Y., from 
New York City in 1995. ``There were a number of challenges that went 
far beyond simply relocating computers for 1,000 people,'' said Art 
Carapola, Mastercard's vice-president for global internal technology. 
``INS was commissioned to provide the network expertise we were lacking 
in-house at the time.'' He added, ``Considering the unusually compressed 
schedule, as well as the complexity of the network transition, I do 
not believe we would have met our goals without INS.'' The company 
that wins such praise from its clients was the creation of Donald 
McKinney, one of the founders of Silicon Graphics Inc. He use his 
textbook understanding of the inner workings of Silicon Valley to 
create and build INS. First he turned to Sequoia Capital, the venture 
capital firm. He wanted financing, but just as important, he wanted 
the blessing of Donald Valentine, Sequoia's founder, who is also vice-chairman 
of Cisco Systems. Once McKinney won support from Sequoia and Valentine, 
it was relatively easy to convince Cisco, the leader in data networking, 
to invest as well. But just as important, he got Cisco to begin referring 
INS to its customers for installation and support services. Once INS 
was on a solid footing, McKinney could step back. He is still the 
company's chairman but has turned over the chief executive's job to 
John Drew, a former Unisys executive. (In a sign of just how small 
the networking industry really is, Bell Atlantic first built its relationship 
with INS in part through a former Unisys colleague of Drew's named 
Kevin DeNuccio, who helped found Bell Atlantic Network Integration. 
DeNuccio is now an executive at Cisco.) Cisco still owns about 8 percent 
of INS, which has a market value of about $1.1 billion, while McKinney 
owns just over 30 percent. INS compensates each of its 1,000 engineers 
at least partly in stock. McKinney and Drew hope that the stock policy 
gives INS a recruiting advantage over larger, slower-growing companies 
that are trying to expand into the network consulting market. ``Our 
intellectual property goes home every night,'' McKinney said. ``What 
we need to do is honor their requests and make them wealthy.'' As 
put by Drew, ``Our focus and our people provide our competitive advantage.'' 
And there is a lot of competition. Each of the telecommunications 
carriers that INS serves as a client is also a potential competitor. 
INS must also contend against consulting companies including Andersen 
and KPMG Peat Marwick; computer services operations including EDS; 
value-added resellers of networking equipment including Entex and 
Vanstar, as well as the growing consulting operations inside telecommunications 
equipment vendors, including Lucent Technologies. But perhaps INS' 
most intriguing competitor is a private consulting company based in 
New York called Predictive Systems Inc. Smaller, younger and even 
less well known than INS, Predictive is perhaps the only company that 
focuses exclusively on the same sort of network consulting as does 
INS. Among its clients are Qwest Communications International, the 
upstart long-distance carrier. Robert Belau, Predictive's president, 
said he was now auditioning investment banks for an initial public 
offering. Naturally, he says his company is better than INS. But if 
he succeeds only in matching his West Coast competitor, he will have 
done quite well, indeed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>