<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0207 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Oct. 5: The world 
has changed greatly in the past year, since the last annual meeting 
of the International Monetary Fund. Then, although policy makers were 
slow to realize it, the world was seeing the first clear problems 
caused by excessive investments in emerging markets. Now the investment 
world has turned on its head. Banks and investors that once acted 
as if there were no risks see nothing but risks. An international 
credit crunch is looming, in which many will not be able to borrow. 
The Clinton administration is right to look for ways to deal with 
that problem. Its idea of setting up an IMF procedure to provide capital 
to countries threatened by rapid withdrawals of funds deserves careful 
consideration, as does a Japanese initiative to aid Asian countries, 
during the annual meetings of the IMF and World Bank this week in 
Washington. The greatest risk is that major countries will be unable 
to reach agreement on effective action. The meetings come with the 
IMF having been humbled over the past year as its prescriptions for 
troubled Asian countries did not produce the desired cures, and unwanted 
side effects forced it to dilute the medication. When first Thailand 
and then South Korea and Indonesia got into trouble in 1997, the IMF 
prescribed a blend of fiscal and monetary belt-tightening that is 
best suited to countries whose governments have been running big budget 
deficits. But the problems in Asia were more in the private sector, 
stemming in part from crony capitalism but largely from the willingness 
of investors to shovel capital at banks and companies that were ill 
equipped to use it wisely. Severe recessions have resulted, forcing 
the IMF to be less stringent. With investors now excessively risk 
averse, and with many companies and banks in emerging markets burdened 
with unpayable debts, the biggest risk confronting the world is of 
deflation and global recession. That means ways must be found to restructure 
debts _ with penalties for those who lent money imprudently as well 
as for those who borrowed the money. Economies must be kept functioning 
while needed reforms are made. The IMF must play a role in that process, 
and in ways that make it more likely its aid will benefit the people 
of the affected countries _ rather than bail out investors, as has 
happened too often in the past. The Clinton proposal would have the 
IMF lend money to countries that have made reforms but still face 
capital flight in the current risk-averse investing environment. In 
some cases, those countries will probably have to move to floating 
exchange rates, something the IMF has resisted in the past but will 
sometimes need to encourage. The need for the IMF to adjust to changed 
conditions is clear. But that should not obscure the fact that in 
a world with hesitant investors, countries that deserve support may 
have to turn to the IMF. Approving the $18 billion the administration 
is seeking will probably be only the first step needed, but some members 
of the House Republican leadership continue to balk with time running 
out in the current session. They owe it to the world to approve the 
money immediately. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>