<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here are seven questions overlooked in the torrent of testimony. 1. 
Why, amid all the supplementary boxes of referrals to Congress by 
the independent counsel, is there not one word about the harassment 
and intimidation of Kathleen Willey? In President Clinton's grand 
jury appearance, we witnessed his direct contradiction of Willey's 
assertions about nonconsensual Oval Office groping. But her testimony 
about that and subsequent pressure is still being withheld. My surmise 
is that an indictment may be forthcoming about what was done to her 
by aides after the alleged pass. Prosecutors, under Justice guidelines, 
tend to delay indictments until after elections. 2. Did Monica tell 
the whole truth? My guess is that she has not. On her volunteered 
statement that ``nobody told me to lie,'' which Clinton lawyers seized 
upon as exculpatory: of course nobody said to her, ``Monica _ lie!'' 
But she was directed to a common cover story and encouraged to submit 
a false affidavit, which is joining a conspiracy to lie. And what 
about the ``talking points'' urging her friend Linda Tripp to testify 
falsely, and backing it up with a cash inducement? Monica swears she 
wrote that document with no legal help, and Clinton lawyers (who still 
claim she lies about their client ever even touching her) insist we 
take as gospel truth her protection of the president and his aides 
on this. Now that we can compare writing styles, it is hard to argue 
that the Monica who wrote the notes and letters is the unaided author 
of the legalistic talking points. 3. Why are House Democrats pushing 
the notion that the Judiciary Committee should deal only with sex? 
No committee of Congress should be forced to concentrate solely on 
crimes to cover up sex. Where is it written that impeachment inquiries 
be limited to prurient material provided by outside prosecutors? Cries 
of ``no fishing expedition'' mean ``don't dig any more deeply'' and 
should be met with ``don't fence us in.'' 4. Why is Henry Hyde's legal 
eagle reportedly throwing away Clinton's abuse of executive privilege 
as an impeachment count? Rarely has our doctrine of checks and balances 
been so egregiously challenged as in Clinton's pattern of refusal 
to answer questions by the co-equal judicial and legislative branches. 
If this president were allowed the power he claims to direct a publicly 
paid aide not to reveal to a criminal grand jury any conversation 
with someone outside government, that would set a precedent transferring 
excessive power to the executive. Not sexy enough? This issue could 
affect the removal votes of a half-dozen Democratic senators. 5. Where, 
as actor Ronald Reagan famously asked, is the rest of me? We have 
a legless referral: Ken Starr has sent over Chapter I of a five-chapter 
book. The three-judge panel overseeing independent counsels should 
direct Starr to indict, expose or exonerate those involved in Whitewater, 
Filegate and Travelgate affairs by a specified date, perhaps tied 
to a coming Supreme Court decision ending Clinton delays by spurious 
claims of executive privilege. Then, as the next Congress convenes, 
two other House committees and a Manhattan prosecutor will send reports 
on campaign finance depredations directly affecting a national election. 
6. Why is no outrage or dismay expressed by Clinton's traditional 
supporters at his unceasing degradation of Betty Currie? Here is a 
woman known for her good character cynically used by the president 
to facilitate acts of bad character, and a person known for strong 
religious values induced by peer pressure to ever-increasing forgetfulness 
while under an oath before her God. That offense by Clinton to a loyal 
and trusting human being may be unimpeachable, but it is unforgivable. 
7. Why are we allowing White House spinmeisters to rig the coming 
evaluation of this ``impeachment election''? American voters will 
decide on Nov. 3 if Clinton will be impeached. But the Clinton line 
is if Democrats merely ``hold their own,'' that is to be interpreted 
as a ringing vote of confidence as if this were a normal midterm election. 
No sale. If Democrats gain strength in Congress, Clinton wins. If 
Republicans extend their majorities, he loses, because the voters' 
message to the House will be: impeach. If it's a breakeven, it's a 
wash, and unsignaled Senate jurors would just have to vote their consciences. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>