<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0144 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Japan's top financial officials told their American counterparts this 
weekend that their country's banking system was acutely short of capital, 
with the top 19 banks in deeper trouble than Tokyo has ever before 
admitted, according to officials familiar with the discussions. At 
a private meeting Saturday, the governor of the Bank of Japan, Masaru 
Hayami, told Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and Alan Greenspan, the 
chairman of the Federal Reserve, that the capital supporting those 
19 major banks has dwindled to dangerously low levels in recent months. 
The capital reserve levels are now so low that these banks of the 
world's second largest economy might be banned from operating internationally 
``if the rules were vigorously pursued,'' said a senior Japanese official, 
relating the conversation. But on Sunday, in a reflection of the enormous 
confusion surrounding Japan's financial crisis, other senior Japanese 
officials disputed Hayami's presentation and insisted that the reserve 
levels have not declined to dangerous levels. Banks that want to operate 
globally are required to keep on hand capital amounting to at least 
8 percent of their outstanding loans. Few and fewer of Japan's banks 
can meet that standard today. Hayami's remarks suggest some may fall 
below the 4 percent minimum for operating within Japan's borders. 
Japan's conflicting explanations came as leaders of the world's major 
economies met here for a second day at the annual meetings of the 
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund to grapple with an 
economic crisis that many fear has spun out of control. On Sunday, 
Rubin again pressed for changes at the fund and the bank that would 
improve their ability to head of crises. ``Strengthening the response 
to the current crisis and creating a modern framework for the global 
markets of the 21st century will not be easy or quick,'' Rubin said 
before the committee that oversees the IMF's operations. But many 
officials here, including James Wolfensohn, president of the World 
Bank, argued on Sunday that countries should focus their energies 
on the immediate crisis and postpone a broader discussion of remaking 
the global financial system. Rubin's meeting with Japanese officials 
on Saturday took place in the ornate private conference room adjacent 
to his office at the Treasury. The session also included Japan's finance 
minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, a 78-year-old former prime minister who 
has negotiated with the United States since the U.S. occupation ended 
nearly a half-century ago. Later, Hayami discussed the problem publicly, 
though in less detail, telling reporters that Japan's major banks 
were ``undercapitalized.'' He called on Japan's parliament to inject 
billions of taxpayer dollars into the banks to restore them to health, 
a hugely controversy question within the country. Bolstering Japan's 
ravaged banking system is considered by many experts the single most 
critical factor in quelling the global financial turmoil that has 
rocked markets around the world. But there are still disputes, inside 
Japan and beyond its borders, over just how much trouble the banks 
are in. Much depends on how the figures are calculated _ and there 
are many ways to manipulate the numbers. Hayami, who runs Japan's 
independent central bank, appeared to be painting a bleak picture 
in the meeting at the Treasury, describing how banks have been forced 
to eat into their capital to write off enormous bad loans in real 
estate. He used, Japanese officials said later, a narrow definition 
of the banks' capital that put their condition in the most perilous 
light. On Sunday night officials of the Ministry of Finance, which 
has been accused of greatly mismanaging its regulatory responsibility 
over the banks, insisted that Hayami's presentation to Rubin and Greenspan 
was deeply flawed. In response to queries on Sunday, they offered 
an alternative calculation, based on accounting standards set out 
by the Bank of International Settlements, that they said demonstrated 
that the biggest Japanese banks largely exceeded the 8 percent standard. 
The disagreement seemed to underscore the enormous disarray within 
the Japanese government at a time that the country is being portrayed, 
by U.S. and European officials, as a major cause of the continuing 
turmoil. But it is also possible that some Japanese officials are 
hoping that the disclosures with prompt enough foreign pressure to 
help force parliament to inject billions of dollars into the banking 
system. U.S. officials said that at the meetings on Sunday they were 
successfully building support for a proposal by President Clinton 
to change the strategy of the IMF, so that it can offer pre-emptive 
aid to countries that are fundamentally healthy, but in danger of 
runs on their currency or their banking systems because of ``contagion'' 
from other striken nations. They said it would probably be a number 
of weeks or a few months before the plan is adapted, however. Clinton 
is expected to press for changes in the IMF and an increase in social 
spending in a presentation to finance ministers from 22 nations on 
Monday evening. At the same time, Britain, which has supported Clinton's 
plan, offered a pointed reminder on Sunday that the U.S. proposal 
to restructure the fund would be sharply undercut if Congress failed 
to approve $18 billion in money the United States has committed to 
it. ``The starting point of this is the American government voting 
the resources the IMF requires,'' the British chancellor of the exchequer, 
Gordon Brown, said at a press conference on Sunday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>