<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0134 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The form looks simple. Imbuing it with depth and meaning is something 
else. This lesson came through clearly in a return appearance at City 
Center on Friday night by the group that has toured nationally in 
recent years as the Whirling Dervishes of Turkey. Like a repeated 
abstract design in an oriental carpet, the geometric patterns and 
repetitive turns of the dervishes carry a symbolic meaning. In the 
ceremony, the dervish seeks union with the divine and does so through 
meditation in motion. This group of fine classical musicians, singers 
and dervishes from Konya, Turkey (the Mevlevi Ensemble of the Mevlana 
Culture and Art Foundation), presented by the World Music Institute, 
is a strong antidote to the tourist's view of dervish rituals. The 
program's integration of music and dance (whirling) emphasizes how 
the Sufi order founded by Mevlana Jalaluddin Rumi (1207-1273) fuses 
the devotional and the artistic in praise of God. For all its attention 
to artistry (poems and music), the ceremony is not an outright performance. 
As such it differs, interestingly, from one given last month by La 
Tannoura, a government-sponsored group of dervishes and musicians 
from Egypt who were seen in Lyons, France. There the ceremony was 
a folk entertainment, with the dervishes raising multicolored skirts 
above their heads, sometimes recalling spinning tops. Nor does the 
Turkish group from Konya seek the theatricalization that the Royal 
Swedish Ballet will show in May at the John F. Kennedy Center for 
the Performing Arts in Washington when it presents Jean Borlin's 1920 
ballet, ``Dervishes.'' The Turkish dervishes are more austere, but 
not joyless. In a presentation that preserves a sense of purity, the 
program set the tone with haunting recitations from the Koran by Kani 
Karaca, a blind drummer and singer. The musicians, playing traditional 
Turkish instruments, make room for instrumental solos. A break with 
tradition in the first half of the program introduced three American 
women, Mevlevi disciples, who whirled briefly. The master of ceremonies 
was Shaikh Kabir Helminski, American representative of the Mevlevi 
order. The dervishes, he said, were not performers, and viewers were 
invited as guests. In the strict structure that followed, the seven 
kneeling dervishes rose to shed their black cloaks and stepped forward 
in tall hats and white robes. Their arms crossed and then rose into 
the traditional position of the right palm facing the sky and the 
left toward the ground: the dervish as conduit of divine energy. Turning 
always to the left with one knee raised, each participant moved in 
a circle as he whirled, sometimes gently nudged back into place by 
an ambulatory dance master. The accompanying musical segments could 
end abruptly, but the sense of resolution, symbolized by a circular 
procession, was felt at the end. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>