<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He floated to the Jets in 1993 as a free agent from the University 
of Akron Zips. Who knew zip about safety Victor Green? He landed in 
training camp that season among 15 Jets defensive backs, a bunch that 
included Ronnie Lott, Lonnie Young, Dennis Price, Brian Washington 
and James Hasty. All bigger names. Supposedly, better players, too. 
So, Green knew he had to do something to separate himself. To be noticed. 
He did, hammering his way through on special teams. And that was how 
he made the Jets, on the 1993 practice squad, as a guy who would later 
deliver on special teams. Four Jets head coaches _ Bruce Coslet, Pete 
Carroll, Rich Kotite and now Bill Parcells _ would have the chance 
over the next five years to cut Victor Green, who kept improving and 
eventually found himself a starter at safety. The thinking could easily 
have gone: OK, he made a nice little run, but let's get real. Let's 
get real players. A Zip free agent? The guy is only 5 feet 11 inches 
and 205 pounds. Playing safety? Let's draft some real safeties, some 
big guys from big schools. But none of these coaches could cut him. 
You can't cut a real player. This past week, Green knew that he had 
already done something that would separate him. Something that would 
make him rise and be noticed. Back in training camp, he had pulled 
off his shirt, plopped a white construction helmet on his head that 
featured the Jets logo and picked up a sledgehammer. The demolition 
man _ the guy who hits and hits and packs a punch. That was the theme. 
Photos were taken. And Sunday, one of those ran on the cover of the 
program for the Miami game at Giants Stadium. Each of the 75,257 fans 
who entered the stadium must have taken a peek. Must have noticed. 
And then the game started. It was time for Green to separate himself. 
To rise and be noticed. Jets cornerback Ray Mickens had intercepted 
Dan Marino's last-gasp, half-ending bomb before the Dolphins left 
the field at halftime, trailing by 10-3. It was the first interception 
Marino had thrown this season. Then Marino and Miami returned for 
the third quarter and it was New York ball, Miami ball, New York ball, 
Miami ball and it was a stalemate. And then Green, on that second 
Miami possession, intercepted Marino at the Miami 43. He closed on 
the ball and on receiver Lamar Thomas and took it, with 7 minutes 
36 seconds left in the third quarter. And four minutes later the Jets 
had traveled 43 yards the other way for a touchdown and a 17-3 lead. 
Enough to win. Thus, on a day the Jets rose to a 20-9 victory, so 
did Green. Or maybe it was the other way around. The Jets injected 
energy into their season, climbing to 2-2, reaching a 2-0 division 
record after finishing 2-6 in the division last year. As some Jets 
put it, they made Miami calm down. The Dolphins were performing too 
many flips. Miami was unbeaten entering the game, and talk of its 
dominating defense was a nuisance to the Jets. So were Miami's four 
straight victories over the Jets and seven straight with Marino in 
the pocket. The hex is over now, and the Dolphins (3-1) have been 
calmed. The Miami offense entered Sunday's game with a big running 
game and it, too, was calmed. The Miami defense entered ranked No. 
2 and the Jets were ranked 30th, but the Jets did the flipping there. 
Miami Coach Jimmy Johnson said ``everything looked messed up.'' That's 
the result whenever the script is flipped. Green played the run, played 
the pass, played the game with a nonstop motor, as did most of his 
teammates, who beat Miami to the punch, outguessed them and then kept 
playing with force. They played from start to finish to win. To be 
noticed. ``I come from Americus, Ga., a small town, and to get out 
of there you have to work hard to be noticed,'' Green said, smiling. 
Green added: ``I think when I first came to the Jets everybody thought 
I was a long shot. Sort of like today. Miami was riding high and they 
were doing some good things. They looked good. But we had two weeks 
to prepare because of the bye and we had two weeks to get the right 
attitude. You saw a lot of attitude and desire out there today. I 
saw Dan Marino arguing with his linemen and us finally getting some 
pressure on him. That has not happened often. He doesn't like to get 
hit.'' That is Green's specialty. He didn't get to hit Marino Sunday, 
but he made plenty of other crushing hits. He helped the Jets limit 
Miami to 2 of 12 third-down conversions (17 percent); to 52 offensive 
plays compared with the Jets 72; to seven Miami punts. That is a lot 
of punts. But Green does more than hit. He can cover. He can tackle. 
He plays with solid fundamentals mixed with toughness. He led the 
Jets in tackles in each of the last two seasons. Two years ago, he 
led the league with 206 tackles. Lamar Thomas, the Dolphins receiver, 
said of the Jets' secondary: ``Aaron Glenn is the only guy back there 
who stands out. They ask Glenn to cover single all day at cornerback 
and the other guys just fill in and do their roles. They do a nice 
job together. But Glenn is the only special guy.'' Green listened. 
He was disappointed. He was calm. ``There is so much I guess he does 
not see,'' Green said. ``You look at me and other players in our secondary 
and we are all asked to do some special things. I want to do more. 
That is already happening. So, I'll keep doing the things I do and 
I know that people will notice. One day I will make my dream and make 
the Pro Bowl and this team will win a Super Bowl and there will be 
enough for everyone to notice. We'll all make a name for ourselves. 
Just keep watching.'' Some already notice. A free agent turned starter 
now turning into a star. Victor Green is separating himself, rising 
and knocking down walls. He does not need a sledgehammer to do it. 
No, more hard work will do. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>