<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0147 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five thousand miles away, at the real Oktoberfest, the mayor of Munich, 
Germany, kicked things off this year, as is the solemn tradition, 
by pounding a bent bronze spout into a keg of golden brew and declaring 
``O'zapft is,'' or ``It has been tapped.'' So began the two-week quest 
to see whether this year's celebrants would exceed last year's consumption 
of 5.6 million liters of beer, which is, after all, the whole point. 
But at Cullman's 17th annual Oktoberfest, which began Sunday, there 
were no such beery pronouncements. In fact, the celebrants were fortified 
with nothing stronger than tart lemonade. And that will be the case 
throughout the weeklong festival. No beer at the Friday night street 
dance. No beer with the bratwurst and schnitzel at the daily German 
lunches and dinners. Not a drop. Cullman County is dry, bone dry, 
and has been for 60 years. And that creates something of a culture 
clash at this time each year, as the descendants of the German immigrants 
who settled this area honor their heritage in a way that the volk 
from the old country simply would not understand. It is a far different 
scene from the one on the Theresienweise in Munich, where thousands 
of revelers cram into cavernous brewery tents to quaff strong beer. 
``They really would not comprehend it, that you could have an Oktoberfest 
without any alcoholic beverages,'' said Fred Abt, who served as the 
burgermeister of last year's celebration in Cullman, a town that had 
13,367 people in the last census. ``But we still have a good time.'' 
Abt is right, of course. A number of Germans and several experts on 
German culture interviewed in recent days seemed unable to fully digest 
the notion of a beerless version of Oktoberfest, the street party 
that began in 1810 as a royal wedding celebration. Someone might as 
well have announced that there would now be speed limits on the autobahn. 
``It's a little bit impossible,'' said Klaus Kries, a Munich engineer. 
``Then it is not Oktoberfest!'' declared Gabi Papke, a spokeswoman 
for the Munich Tourist Office. James McMahon, a professor of German 
at Emory University, explained that ``having Oktoberfest without beer 
is like having the Fourth of July without fireworks.'' That being 
said, the 150 people who attended Sunday afternoon's ceremonies seemed 
to be enjoying themselves. The Cullman High School German band, in 
new uniforms of lederhosen and dirndls, admirably performed a medley 
of oompah songs, including, somewhat subversively, ``Roll Out the 
Barrel.'' The 1998 burgermeister, the Rev. Harold Hermetz of St. Paul's 
Lutheran Church, was installed, using his brief speech to extol the 
importance of hard work. The new Miss Oktoberfest, Emma Hohenberger, 
was selected in a rather nontraditional way. Each of nine contestants 
was handed a chocolate frosted cupcake and told to bite into the middle. 
The winner would be the one who found a pretzel inside. ``Oh, my God!'' 
Miss Hohenberger exclaimed as she chomped down, her voice muffled 
by the dry cake she was trying to swallow. And then Stanley Johnson, 
the great-great nephew of Col. John Gottfried Cullman, the town's 
venerated founder, regaled the crowd with town history. It seems that 
Cullman, a Bavarian merchant who fled Bismarck's Germany, was searching 
for unsettled farmland near the newly laid L&AMP;N Railroad tracks 
to establish a community for other German refugees. He brought the 
first five families here in 1873. More than 10,000 German immigrants 
followed. While intermarriage has diluted the bloodlines, cultural 
vestiges have survived in Cullman's restaurants and Lutheran churches. 
And recently there has been Oktoberfest. ``It gives us a chance to 
retain our German heritage,'' said Abt, who chose not to wear lederhosen 
Sunday only because his wife said his legs looked too white. ``It's 
a fun time when we can reminisce about our ancestors and the newcomers 
can enjoy the fellowship and food, even though it's only with coffee, 
tea and cold drinks.'' There was plenty of drinking here in the old 
days, with saloons and a traveling schnapps wagon that sold beer for 
a dime. But as Baptists infiltrated the region, the county voted itself 
dry in the late 1930s. Frequent referendums to overturn the prohibition 
have all failed. The Chamber of Commerce supports a reversal, which 
it says would help Cullman lure meetings and new restaurants. Many 
here are convinced that because the county is dry, Cullman lost the 
giant Mercedes plant that located near Tuscaloosa a few years ago. 
Several years ago, the owners of Stiefelmeyer's Deli smuggled in a 
keg of beer for an Oktoberfest party, drawing a large crowd until 
the police arrived to haul the owners to jail. And even today, several 
residents said, it is not uncommon for Oktoberfest celebrants to disappear 
mysteriously for a few moments after explaining that they need to 
check on something in their cars. But tourism officials do their best 
by promoting the festival as a unique opportunity for family fun. 
And town fathers say that in the end the real meaning of Oktoberfest 
is not lost in all the sobriety. ``People are so busy these days that 
they don't spend time together,'' Hermetz said. ``The emphasis here 
is just on good fellowship and getting to know your neighbors.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>