<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Yankees were only four outs from advancing to the American League 
Championship Series for the second straight season last year when 
Sandy Alomar Jr. swatted a stunning, game-tying home run off Mariano 
Rivera. The Cleveland Indians scored the winning run the next inning, 
won the next day as well and went on to win the American League pennant. 
The Indians were two outs away from winning the World Series when 
Jose Mesa, their Mariano Rivera, gave up the game-tying run. The Florida 
Marlins won the game in the 11th inning, and they, not the Indians, 
succeeded the Yankees as World Series champions. Life in postseason 
baseball is that fragile. The high wire blows wildly in the wind, 
and the best collection of players doesn't always make it safely to 
the other side. The Atlanta Braves have learned that reality all too 
often in this decade. They have reached the National League Championship 
Series this season for an unprecedented seventh successive time, and 
they have only one World Series championship to show for their success. 
That development has prompted some blurry-minded critics to belittle 
the Braves as underachievers. The same mentality is starting to go 
after the Indians, too. The Indians are in the playoffs for the fourth 
consecutive year. In their first three October trips, they reached 
the World Series twice. They won neither time, losing a year ago to 
the Marlins after affording the Braves their lone conquest in 1995. 
The Yankees, who block the Indians' way to this year's World Series 
and look as formidable as the former Berlin wall, could invite their 
own line of criticism should they fail to beat the Indians. They would 
be belittled for falling short of the level that a team with 114 regular-season 
victories should achieve. Critics are everywhere. Frankly, John Schuerholz 
is tired of them. ``I can't help people if they're going to continue 
to use World Series wins as the criteria for what your ultimate success 
has been,'' Schuerholz, the Atlanta general manager, said Sunday, 
not 24 hours after the Braves completed their three-game sweep of 
the wild-card Chicago Cubs. ``We think appearing in seven consecutive 
National League Championship Series is fairly remarkable on its own. 
No one's ever done that. I think with the wild card it will be even 
harder for people to do. We had talented enough teams to win another 
World Series or two. We didn't. I'd like to win another World Series 
or two so I don't have to answer this question.'' Repeating as World 
Series champions has basically been eliminated from the realm of the 
likely. In the past 20 years only the Toronto Blue Jays of 1992 and 
'93 won successive World Series. The path to the ultimate round of 
postseason games is rife with potholes, if not mines. Many baseball 
people say only the wealthiest teams have a chance to reach the postseason, 
let alone the World Series, but money can only buy a ticket to watch 
the World Series games, not play in them. The Baltimore Orioles could 
have bought a lot of tickets with the nearly $70 million they spent 
on players' salaries this year. ``There's one more layer of survival 
demanded of you,'' Schuerholz said by telephone from his home in Atlanta, 
referring to the division series that was implemented along with the 
wild card in 1995. ``It's a 15-round heavyweight fight instead of 
a 10-round heavyweight fight. It's challenging.'' The Braves have 
managed to survive the new first round each year, executing three-game 
sweeps the last three years. But they have struggled in the last two 
league championship rounds, rallying from a three-games-to-one deficit 
to knock off St. Louis in 1996, then falling to Florida last year, 
4-2. ``Most people don't understand how very difficult it is to put 
yourself in position to be in contention for that `ultimate' measuring 
criterion, that is, a world championship,'' Schuerholz said. ``There's 
no denying it would be a lot nicer and simpler had we won in '91, 
which maybe we should have or would have except for some bad base-running, 
or in '96 when we had a two-games-to-none lead. Then all of this would 
be moot. But we didn't, so the question keeps being asked.'' Because 
the Braves have won only the 1995 World Series, their manager, Bobby 
Cox, suffers criticism for alleged failure instead of receiving recognition 
for keeping complacency out of his clubhouse and keeping his players 
focused on returning to October each year. Mike Hargrove has begun 
to be labeled with some of the same unfair talk that Cox has heard. 
If Cleveland falls short again this season _ and the Yankees are certainly 
expected to end the Indians' season in the next four to seven games 
_ some people may even call for Hargrove's head. His dismissal, at 
least. Jimy Williams, the Boston manager, was criticized for starting 
Pete Schourek instead of Pedro Martinez in Saturday's fourth game 
with the Indians. But after Schourek pitched well enough for the Red 
Sox to win, he was questioned for having Tom Gordon, his closer, pitch 
two innings instead of one, as he had all season. The only problem 
with the second second-guess was that Gordon gave up the two runs 
that decided the game in his first inning of work, not his second. 
Now it is Hargrove whose decisions will be scrutinized against the 
Yankees, and Cox's whose moves will receive the same treatment in 
the National League pennant playoff. ``You have to be talented first, 
and somewhat fortunate as well,'' Schuerholz said. ``I think we have 
the talent this year. Hopefully we'll have good fortune as well.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>