<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0142 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Local elections that the government was counting on to bring stability 
to the turbulent state of Chiapas were thrown into unexpected turmoil 
Sunday when some of the government's staunchest supporters boycotted 
the balloting. About 40,000 voters from San Juan Chamula, a prosperous 
Tzotzil Indian county which for decades has been a monolithic bastion 
of support for the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party, refused 
to vote or even to allow the election authorities to set up any of 
the 59 polling stations slated for the county. The Indians of Chamula, 
whose rebellious spirit is legendary here, barred the vote as a protest 
to demand the release from jail of five Chamula men they say were 
falsely accused of murder. But because of the peculiar calculus of 
Chiapas elections, the boycott seems likely to torpedo much of the 
government's plan by making it impossible to inaugurate a new state 
legislature. The elections were for all 40 seats in the legislature 
and the mayoralties of 103 counties. This year President Ernesto Zedillo 
adopted an aggressive policy to undermine support for the Zapatista 
rebels, whose followers hail from the Indian villages of the highlands 
and jungles of Chiapas. While dismantling parallel county governments 
set up by the Zapatistas, the government blanketed the state with 
well-financed social programs to draw the Indian population away from 
the guerrilla movement. The elections Sunday were crucial to that 
strategy. The state authorities decided to press forward with them 
despite torrential floods that last month washed away dozens of villages 
along Chiapas' Pacific coast. Elections could not be scheduled in 
eight counties and three state legislative districts out of a total 
of 24. No date has been set to make up those elections. Now, with 
no balloting in San Juan Chamula, not enough members have been chosen 
to make a quorum to convene the new legislature. In most places the 
voting came off normally, but abstention rates appeared to be high. 
Preliminary results were expected by Monday. The events pointed up 
the vast gap between the Indian communities of Chiapas and the largely 
non-Indian, or mestizo, state government. Late Saturday the speaker 
of the state legislature, Juan Carlos Bonifaz Trujillo _ who is from 
the Institutional Revolutionary Party, known by the Spanish acronym 
PRI _ and officials from the State Supreme Court traveled by helicopter 
to San Juan Chamula, where generally more than 95 percent of any vote 
goes to the PRI. They tried to cajole disgruntled residents to permit 
the polling stations to open. Standing before 500 restive Indians 
in the cobbled square of the county seat, with firecrackers booming 
in a celebration of a local patron saint, Bonifaz warned that blocking 
an election is a felony but promised to speed the trials of the five 
jailed Chamula men. As soon Bonifaz headed back towards his helicopter 
the Chamula men, all in their distinctive black wool ponchos, began 
shouting. ``No way! No voting!'' said Pedro Hernandez Lopez, 42, raising 
both fists. ``We have no problems with the government or with the 
PRI. But no one here is going to vote until we have our five men back!'' 
The conflict is part of a 30-year clash in San Juan Chamula between 
the Catholics who control the community and an insurgent group of 
Evangelical Protestants. The five imprisoned men are facing trial 
in the slayings of two Protestants. Recently a well-known Protestant, 
Manuel Collazo, was acquitted of the murder of a Chamula Catholic, 
in a court verdict that awakened public suspicion of corruption. Collazo's 
release sparked the demands for the release of the five accused Catholics. 
The apparent failure of the legislative elections was alarming to 
opposition parties as well as the government, since the opposition 
expected to elect many mayors and possibly take a majority in the 
statehouse. The Zapatistas were largely quiet. In national elections 
in July 1997, the rebels burned or broke up dozens of polling stations 
across the state. But in a communique on Saturday, Subcommander Marcos, 
the Zapatistas' top strategist and spokesman, said the rebels would 
not disrupt these elections. Although he was not explicit, Zapatistas 
appeared to be under instructions not to vote. But in at least one 
Zapatista stronghold, the county of Pantelho, hundreds of Zapatista 
sympathizers turned out to cast ballots for an opposition party. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>