<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a concession born of crisis, Russia has agreed to sell the United 
States up to all its allotted research time aboard the first phase 
of the International Space Station for $60 million, NASA officials 
say. In theory, the deal reduces Russia's role to that of a builder 
but not a user of the biggest space project, at least during its many 
years of orbital assembly. But the sale would help keep Russia's faltering 
space program alive and its scientists engaged in the project, and 
presumably not searching for foreign work _ a major goal of arms controllers 
in the Clinton administration. The deal was worked out last week in 
Moscow by officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
and the Russian Space Agency, which is increasingly desperate for 
money to fulfill its commitments. The meetings concluded on Friday. 
The accord is the first time Russia has agreed to scale back its use 
of the planned international outpost since it joined the venture five 
years ago. The deal focuses on the assembly phase, which is to start 
in two months and take five or six years. Up to three astronauts are 
to occupy the station while it is being built and seven at completion. 
Daniel Goldin, NASA's administrator, told Congress in a letter last 
week that the agency proposed to buy for $60 million ``up to 100 percent 
of the research time previously allocated to Russia'' in the assembly 
phase. The purchase, he said, includes crew time and ``readily accessible 
stowage space'' aboard the outpost. Some American research projects 
would replace Russian efforts on the station, but the work might end 
up being done by Russian astronauts. In his letter, dated Sept. 29, 
Goldin called the purchase ``urgent'' and said the money had to be 
delivered to Moscow ``no later than'' this Friday if the huge project, 
already a year behind schedule, was to avoid further delays. Even 
with this bailout, assembly plans beyond the first two flights are 
in tatters because the financially squeezed Russians have been unable 
to finish a major unit. If and when it is finished, the outpost of 
laboratories and living areas is to be nearly the size of two football 
fields, orbiting hundreds of miles above Earth, powered by huge arrays 
of solar-energy cells. NASA officials said details of the new accord 
would be described on Wednesday at a hearing of the House Science 
Committee. But there is growing animosity in Congress over NASA's 
handling of the Russian crisis. Already, some members are complaining 
of deception. ``It's smoke and mirrors,'' said Rep. Tim Roemer, D-Ind., 
a longtime opponent of the space station project. ``What NASA has 
done is to propose a leveraged buyout of the Russian Space Agency,'' 
he said. ``All you have left is Russian participation as a subsidiary 
of NASA.'' But other committee members worry that the Russians are 
getting too much and giving up too little. At best, they say, Russia's 
research area in the unfinished outpost is small and unsubstantial. 
``It's not clear that they have all that much to give us, and maybe 
it's not worth the money,'' said a congressional aide, who spoke on 
condition of anonymity. ``They're giving up something they don't really 
have.'' His skepticism focused mainly on the station's third element, 
known as the service module, which the Russians are building. It is 
crucial, but it remains unfinished. Its troubles have precipitated 
the frantic maneuvering to save the Russians and keep the station 
project on track. It is also the place where Russia had planned to 
do its research in the station's long assembly. In theory, aside from 
astronaut time, the alcoves of the service module are among the few 
concrete goods on orbit that Moscow has to offer. Because of Russia's 
economic problems, completion and launching of the unit have been 
pushed back from next April to July at the earliest, throwing next 
year's station assembly sequence into turmoil. The new deal focusing 
on the sale of Russian research time represents an abrupt shift in 
NASA's strategy to save its troubled Russian partner. Early in September, 
the agency proposed buying two rescue craft for the station from Russia 
at a cost of roughly $100 million. But that plan has been dropped 
for the moment for reasons that have not been spelled out. In the 
new plan, NASA would divert $60 million to Moscow from its accounts 
for station development and operations. Congressional experts say 
NASA can do that on its own authority, but they add that taking that 
step without Congress' blessing would only sour relations further. 
Publicly, the agency has offered few other details of the goods and 
services it would buy to bail out its Russian partners in building 
the sprawling outpost. In September, it said it wanted to send Moscow 
as much as $660 million over five years. In a statement issued on 
Friday, NASA said the officials meeting in Moscow had agreed to press 
ahead to launch the first station element in November, speeding the 
countdown for the start of project. As currently cast with Russian 
participation, the International Space Station began in 1993 and is 
expected to cost about $50 billion. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>