<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Advertising revenue has fallen off sharply at Dow Jones &AMP; Co.'s 
two major newspapers, The Wall Street Journal and Barron's, a sign 
of newspapers' vulnerability to industry-by-industry and region-by-region 
economic storms. But to date, according to several newspaper business 
executives and two economists at the Newspaper Association of America, 
an industry trade group, most newspaper companies have gained at least 
as much as they have lost despite the gyrations of the world's financial 
markets. The Journal's third-quarter advertising volume was down about 
6.7 percent over the corresponding quarter in 1997, Dow Jones said. 
The September comparisons were off more sharply, reflecting an increasingly 
steep drop in advertising from banks and other major financial concerns, 
according to a Dow Jones executive who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
Late last week, Dow Jones also announced a buyout plan for 340 eligible 
employees who turn 55 by the end of the year and have worked for Dow 
Jones for at least 10 years. That development, said Richard Tofel, 
a spokesman for the company, had been planned for nearly two months 
and was unrelated to the bad news about advertising revenues. The 
company's stock rose $1 Friday to close at $44.6875. Miles Groves, 
the chief economist for the Newspaper Association of America, an industry 
trade group, said the Journal's revenue decline was an anomaly because 
it is a traditional vehicle for financial services advertising. ``It's 
in the most vulnerable sector,'' Groves said. ``For most newspapers, 
it's a different situation.'' For instance, he and James Conaghan, 
the association's director for market and business analysis, said 
the trend of deregulation in utility industries had been a boon for 
newspapers, which are prime vehicles for the newly competitive industry's 
advertising. Over all, Groves said, he would not alter his standing 
forecast that spending by companies and individuals advertising in 
newspapers would increase by more than 6 percent this year. But there 
are setbacks in some regions. The Boston Globe, which is owned by 
The New York Times Co.; The San Jose Mercury-News, one of the biggest 
papers in the Knight Ridder newspaper chain; and The Los Angeles Times, 
the flagship of the Times Mirror Co., have all seen classified advertising 
revenues, particularly those from help-wanted ads, scaled back since 
the high-technology business started losing customers in Asia, because 
of economic turmoil there. Local housing market trends had a negative 
impact in Miami and San Francisco. The Miami Herald, another Knight 
Ridder paper, has had difficulties with classified advertising for 
a different reason. A building boom, fueled in part by demand from 
Latin American buyers seeking a place of their own in Miami, went 
through a lull in the last year, according to The Herald's publisher, 
Alberto Ibarguen. The result has been a softening in revenue from 
real estate advertising. The decline, Ibarguen added, began long before 
the summer shocks in the world's financial markets. ``Our issues have 
been classified all year long,'' he said. Lee Guittar, the publisher 
and editor of The San Francisco Examiner, which is owned by Hearst 
Corp., said a robust housing market had meant few vacancies and therefore 
fewer real estate ads: while ad revenues were running about 6.5 percent 
ahead of 1997 in the first two quarters, the increase was closer to 
2 percent in the third quarter, he said. In Dallas, the opening of 
a city airport is expected to bring new airline competition to challenge 
the dominant Southwest Airlines _ an industry battle that could mean 
new advertising for The Dallas Morning News, according to Burl Osborne, 
the newspaper's publisher. But the newspaper, which had record-high 
revenues in telecommunications advertising in 1997, has not been able 
to improve on those figures significantly, he added. The Morning News 
is owned by A.H. Belo Co. The New York Times also saw a slight falloff 
in classified advertising revenues, largely in the help-wanted category, 
said Nancy Nielsen, spokeswoman for The New York Times Co. But, she 
added, national advertising revenues have far outpaced the 1997 figures. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>