<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0114 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the start of the '90s, when employers' health insurance costs were 
surging 15 percent a year, the giant Sprint Corp. was quick to shift 
to health maintenance organizations and their businesslike management 
of medical care. Sprint's costs promptly stabilized. Today, its comprehensive 
benefit program stands as a model of what Congress and industry envisioned 
four years ago when they rejected President Clinton's health plan 
and left the health care system to the tides of the marketplace. Yet 
along the hallways at Sprint headquarters here, the great expectations 
for managed care have dimmed. In a score of interviews with workers 
and managers, no one recounted the kind of HMO horror story that makes 
headlines: The wrong leg amputated, a child denied a transplant. Instead, 
they said they had found managed care to be exasperating, callous 
and sometimes just senseless. Kevin Leroy, a Sprint sales compensation 
manager, says his HMO, Cigna, saved his 10-year-old daughter's life 
with months of hospitalization to help her conquer a mysterious immune 
system disorder. But it also required him to interrupt three days 
of work to get a third doctor's opinion before authorizing hernia 
surgery for him. The toddler son of Elsa Wong, a project manager, 
suffered an ear infection for a year before her HMO primary-care physician 
sent him to a specialist. When Phyllis Van Kamp, a secretary, had 
the fever and deep cough of bronchitis, a clinician told her over 
the phone to try aspirin for a few days. Today managed care plans 
are entrenched in the economy, enrolling 61 percent of the population, 
according to the American Association of Health Plans. But managed 
care has lost its luster as an industry and as the answer to the nation's 
health care needs. Managed care has so far served as a different way 
to pay for medical care, not a better way to provide it. Its savings 
to large employers have been real, contributing significantly to the 
current economic boom, but they are likely to prove temporary, while 
coverage has become more expensive for small businesses and the self-employed. 
Perhaps most important, managed care has shifted many consumers' concern 
from cost to quality. In a New York Times poll in July, 85 percent 
of respondents said the health care system needs fundamental change, 
barely below the 90 percent who said the same thing in a Times/CBS 
News poll in 1994 before the Clinton health plan died. Although 68 
percent said they were satisfied with the quality of their family's 
health care, 30 percent said they were not, up from 19 percent in 
1994. And the percentage dissatisfied with the cost of health care 
was practically unchanged, 46 percent now compared with 47 percent 
then. When asked about health maintenance organizations, 58 percent 
of respondents said the HMOs had impeded doctors' ability to control 
treatment, compared with 17 percent who said they had improved it. 
And though a 1995 Harris Poll found more people saying managed care 
would improve the quality of care rather than harm it, the Times poll 
found a sharp reversal, 50 percent saying care would be harmed and 
only 32 percent saying it would be improved. ``Four and a half years 
ago, the country was at a watershed and didn't know it,'' said Dr. 
Leo Henikoff, chief executive of the Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's 
hospital system in Chicago. ``One option,'' he said, ``was a highly 
government-regulated system. That was the Clinton plan, and the country 
abhorred it. They took the other option, to throw health care to the 
marketplace, and four years later, people don't like what they're 
getting.'' The discontent at one time had put health care back at 
the center of political debate, with Democrats especially seizing 
on the issue. But more recently it has been eclipsed in Congress by 
the scandal involving President Clinton, and although both the White 
House and Congress had been considering ``patient protection'' laws, 
nothing is likely to emerge this year. At the state level, more than 
40 states have chipped away at the marketplace model with new regulations. 
But no two states have adopted the same restraints and there is no 
agreement on a comprehensive system that might work better. Within 
the health profession itself, experts are predicting a far more wrenching 
debate focusing on ways to improve health care, not the system that 
pays for it. Managed care was promoted as a means of reducing costs 
by emphasizing preventive care and purging redundant and unnecessary 
care. But now the practice of managed care is seen as little more 
than a short-sighted way to manage costs. ``Managed care so far is 
largely an insurance phenomenon,'' said David Lawrence, chief executive 
of Kaiser Permanente of Oakland, Calif., the nation's largest nonprofit 
health maintenance organization. ``So far, we've had not much impact 
on the quality of care,'' he said. ``Ironically, the way to do that 
is by improving care, not by withholding it.'' But for all the populist 
vilification of managed care companies like Aetna and United Health 
Care, Cigna and Kaiser, the companies work within constraints set 
by other, often mightier, businesses. These are the nation's largest 
employers, its Sprints. A study published in the April issue of The 
New England Journal of Medicine said, ``Large portions of the health 
care system have undergone revolutionary change, and not for the purpose 
of improving health care, but in order to reduce the cost of doing 
business for large corporations.'' Dr. Paul Ellwood, a retired pediatric 
neurologist in Jackson Hole, Wyo., and an early proponent of managed 
care, said there is ``a misconception about who's in charge. It's 
not the HMOs. It's the large corporate buyers of medical care.'' Corporations 
with tens of thousands of employees know they can break an HMO by 
terminating its contract, so they can draw the line on what they will 
pay. That, more than the much scorned HMO ``utilization manager'' 
who must approve doctors' procedures, defines the services that employees 
get and those they are denied. Prescription plans, for example, often 
limit the medications that are covered, because employers object to 
the cost of covering all medications, said Donald Brain Jr., a consultant 
in Kansas City who negotiates plans for small businesses. Such a plan, 
Brain said, might include one antidepressant, Prozac, but not another, 
Zoloft. So if a physician decides Zoloft is more suitable for a patient, 
the patient will have to pay for it himself if he wants it. The patient 
blames the HMO, Brain said, ``but it's the employer who makes the 
decision.'' Large corporations can also use their leverage to obtain 
a good mix of care and prices. ``We're trying to provide a healthy 
work force to the best of our ability, provide choice to the best 
of our ability and attract good people and keep them,'' said J. Robert 
Dinneen Jr., assistant vice president for corporate benefits at Sprint. 
Not all employees, however, are benefiting. While workers for big 
companies like Sprint get a break on the cost of their health insurance, 
tens of millions of others, the employees of small businesses that 
lack Sprint's negotiating clout, have seen their costs continue to 
rise at the 1980s rate. In a survey last year of companies with fewer 
than 200 workers, the journal Health Affairs found that the average 
monthly payroll deduction for family health insurance had leaped from 
$34 in 1988 to $175 in 1996. Harold Thornton, the owner of National 
Consulting Services near Kansas City, a firm with eight full-time 
employees, ended his contract with Humana last year after it told 
him his premium would go up nearly 50 percent in 1998. After considering 
six other health plans, his employees chose United Healthcare, which 
offered more benefits and more choice than Humana but still raised 
their premiums 25 percent. Because Thornton says he can afford to 
pay just 50 percent of the premiums for his employees, they pay $75 
to $600 a month for health insurance, depending on their age and coverage. 
That is five to 10 times more than workers pay at Sprint, which covers 
90 percent of premiums. ``If you think that you're going to get anywhere 
near the benefits or costs and resulting value that a large business 
such as Sprint is going to receive,'' Thornton said of small businesses, 
``you will be woefully disappointed.'' Still, there are limits to 
how much large employers can squeeze managed care companies, and corporations 
like Sprint are starting to accept larger increases in premiums in 
return for improved services and more options. This year Sprint accepted 
a 3.8 percent increase, after three years when increases totaled 3.2 
percent. An increase of 5 percent to 6 percent is likely for next 
year, Dinneen said. ``We're giving up some clout for choice,'' he 
said. ``We're assuming it will be much tougher this year to keep rates 
at as modest an increase as they have been in the past.'' Increases 
are likely in any case, however, because in their race to enroll the 
work force, 49 percent of the nation's 650 HMOs lost money through 
September last year, said InterStudy Publications in Minneapolis, 
which tracks the industry. Four years ago, InterStudy said, 90 percent 
were profitable. Ominously for the economy, employers and subscribers, 
HMOs are trying to rebuild their profits with higher premiums. As 
the Kansas City area's largest private employer, Sprint has immense 
leverage over HMOs that want its business, but there is still tension 
between its goals: keeping costs down, and keeping employees not only 
healthy and productive but also happy with their benefits. The formula 
Sprint has settled on works, to a point. Employees say they usually 
get the care they need. But they say that under managed care, routine 
events like having blood drawn or having a baby can become exasperating 
and, if they drop their guard, something worse. Susan Ott would seem 
to have an edge on the system as human resources director for the 
Local Telecommunications Division. But halfway through her second 
pregnancy, her HMO, Cigna, switched her from St. Joseph's Hospital 
near her home in Overland Park, Kan., to Baptist Hospital in Kansas 
City, Mo., 45 minutes away. Ms. Ott had gestational diabetes and had 
to have blood drawn once and sometimes twice a week, and Cigna required 
that she use Baptist. Finally she complained to her obstetrician, 
so he did it in his office. Ms. Ott still had to go to Baptist to 
deliver, however. She was in for another surprise. ``I was checked 
in and out in 23 hours,'' she said. ``I was John Wayne, walking down 
the hall with my newborn.'' Congress later mandated that hospitals 
allow two days for births, but Ms. Ott had already had enough of Cigna. 
She switched to another HMO with a Sprint contract. Sprint offers 
an unusually large range of choices: five managed care plans and HMOs, 
plus two traditional fee-for-service plans, which permit employees 
to seek whatever care they want wherever they want. That option can 
be expensive, however, costing a family needing a lot of care as much 
as $6,000 a year, so less than 20 percent of the work force chooses 
it. In managed care plans, each subscriber typically has a primary 
care ``gatekeeper,'' the physician who provides all routine care, 
keeps his charts and refers him to specialists. Sprint employees, 
though, have stumbled upon a peculiar feature of many HMOs: the phantom 
gatekeeper. The gatekeeper function survives: Charts are kept, medicines 
are prescribed and referrals are made. But when a patient visits the 
clinic, he sees whoever is available. It is rarely the same doctor, 
and sometimes it is a nurse. Having little confidence that anyone 
really knows them or their conditions, some Sprint workers have devised 
a strategy to make the plans work for them. They trust their own instincts. 
They do their own research. They don't accept no for an answer. They 
persist. In effect, they manage their managed care. Phyllis Tasby 
and her family have been covered by Kaiser for 11 years. ``I love 
my primary care physician,'' said Ms. Tasby, a Sprint human resources 
manager. Kaiser was instrumental in helping her stop smoking and lose 
weight, she said. Then last year, she brought in her 13-year-old son 
because his left leg was bowing. A doctor correctly diagnosed it as 
Blount's disease, a condition in which the upper shin bone stops producing 
bone tissue. ``But they didn't tell me anything about it,'' Ms. Tasby 
said. ``I went on the Internet and found information myself.'' When 
she went back to Kaiser and asked about corrective surgery, ``They 
told me I shouldn't do anything until he was 16.'' ``So I went outside 
Kaiser,'' she said. ``I paid $350 to a specialist. He told me I should 
do the surgery now.'' Again she returned to Kaiser, and this time 
she was referred to a Kaiser orthopedist, who also recommended surgery. 
The boy had the operation in January and Kaiser covered it. ``I won't 
quit Kaiser,'' Ms. Tasby said. But she has learned something about 
life with an HMO. ``They think, `What the customer doesn't know won't 
hurt. If they ask, we'll give it to them.''' Critics of managed care 
say that so far the marketplace has been a ham-handed manager of medicine. 
In cutting premiums to attract employers and patients, in chipping 
away at excess and in wringing discounts from its physicians, hospitals 
and drug companies, HMOs have produced scant evidence that care itself 
is actually managed, or that the health plans' customers are any healthier. 
There is plenty of evidence that some hospitals and their doctors 
are providing erroneous, excessive and inappropriate care, while others 
do much better. Dr. Lawrence of Kaiser, for example, said some hospitals 
deliver five times as many babies by Caesarean section as others, 
most of them unnecessary. The New England Journal of Medicine has 
found that 34.5 percent of all women who get mammograms in their 40s 
receive false positive results and then often are treated unnecessarily. 
Estimates of preventable deaths in hospitals, those arising from mistakes 
and mistreatment, range from 120,000 a year to 180,000. ``Sloppy care 
is not cheap care,'' said Bruce Fried, a former assistant secretary 
in the Department of Health and Human Services. Analysts say that 
true management of care can curb the cost of errors and excess. They 
look to the developing discipline of evidence-based medicine to enable 
doctors make better decisions on treatment. Already, Kaiser has begun 
recording patients' charts, treatments and treatment results in computers 
across its entire network with the goal of learning what practices 
and treatments work best. Shifting to evidence-based medicine, however, 
will require immense investments in computers and great changes in 
how HMOs and doctors do business. And so its proponents are not making 
the kinds of sweeping promises that HMOs made in the '80s, when managed 
care was still a movement, before the nation's giant insurance companies 
stepped in. The benefits of evidence-based medicine will be a while 
coming, cautioned Uwe Reinhardt, a health care economist at Princeton 
University. Its best hope? ``That after two or three years of premium 
increases, business and government will say, `This doesn't work,' 
and that will wake us up.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>