<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Oct. 5: In the 
final days of a dismal session, Trent Lott appears to have buried 
the best chance in years to clean up the nation's corrupt election 
fund-raising system. The Senate majority leader's last pirouette of 
hypocrisy included his recent description of President Clinton as 
``fund-raiser in chief'' for the Democrats, offered even as Lott was 
raising bundles of money for Republicans and serving as executioner 
in chief for the McCain-Feingold campaign reform bill. But the cause 
of restoring integrity to the American election process is not dead 
permanently. With majorities in both the Senate and the House favoring 
change, it can only gain momentum next year. Campaign reform was repeatedly 
declared finished over the past year by the old hands in Washington, 
only to spring back to life. Once lawmakers were forced to vote, many 
realized that they could not deplore and investigate the excesses 
of the 1996 campaign while doing nothing to prevent their recurrence. 
That is why the Shays-Meehan bill, the House version of reform, passed 
252 to 179, with 61 Republicans defying Newt Gingrich to vote yes. 
In the Senate, 7 Republicans lined up with 45 Democrats to favor change, 
falling short of the 60 necessary to break the filibuster engineered 
by Lott and his chief fund-raiser, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky. This 
page urged Sens. John McCain of Arizona and Russell Feingold of Wisconsin 
to keep trying to reintroduce their bill as an amendment to various 
pieces of legislation, forcing repeated votes that might embarrass 
some Republicans, especially those running for re-election, into supporting 
reform. But McCain now argues that doing so will alienate more Republicans 
than it attracts, especially if the bill is attached to important 
spending bills that need to pass before the end of the fiscal year. 
After a promising performance earlier in the year, McCain has been 
disappointingly deferential to the Republican leadership, perhaps 
because of his presidential ambitions. But the hard reality is that 
it may be too late to push the bill onto the agenda this year. Feingold 
may make another try, and we wish him well. He has persisted in the 
cause of reform when others sneered. He may even be paying a price. 
After promising to limit spending for his own re-election campaign 
to $3.8 million, or a dollar for each voter in Wisconsin, he has been 
flooded by generic ``issue ads'' paid for by the tainted soft money 
harvested in Washington by Lott and McConnell. Lott can score all 
the points he wants by accusing the president of going to too many 
fund-raisers, but Lott plays host to his own soft-money marathons, 
while making sure to hold up banking, tobacco and health care legislation 
so as to squeeze every last dollar out of special interests affected. 
So far in this election cycle, Republican congressional campaign committees 
have raised $37 million, more than five times the amount four years 
ago and nearly twice the sum raised by Democrats. In the last election 
cycle, more than $250 million in unregulated ``soft money'' flowed 
to the political parties from corporations, unions and rich donors 
to the parties. These donations led to the biggest campaign scandals 
in a generation. It is not hard to predict that, with even more soft 
money flowing in the next two years, there will be even bigger scandals. 
Another election tainted by money from wealthy and powerful interests 
will turn off the electorate, and congressional leaders will wonder 
disingenuously what they can do to alleviate public cynicism. Sooner 
or later, the elected politicians will redeem the public's trust and 
return to the spirit of their democracy. It is only a matter of time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>