<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a tense ritual like that being played out around the country, counselors 
and politicians in the New York City suburbs scrambled Sunday to calm 
thousands of elderly people who learned second-hand over the weekend 
that their health insurer would drop them on Jan. 1. Oxford Health 
Plans said it would cancel the coverage of 26,600 of the people who 
had chosen to receive their Medicare benefits through a health maintenance 
organization, Oxford Medicare Advantage. The company said that costs 
and losses were forcing it to cancel coverage in Westchester County 
and three other counties in New York, nine counties in New Jersey 
and six of eight in Connecticut, including Fairfield County. Oxford 
subscribers in other areas, including New York City, will not be affected, 
the company said. On Monday, Oxford plans to begin mailing letters 
explaining the change to all 156,000 of its Medicare members, but 
many learned about the cutbacks from news reports after the company 
announced its plans on Friday night. The result, advocates for the 
elderly said, was confusion and some panic. People 65 and older have 
flocked to the Medicare HMOs, which in many cases charge no premiums 
and have only small co-payments for benefits that include preventive 
care and prescription drugs. The alternative, a Medicare supplement, 
typically costs about $100 a month, according to counselors for the 
elderly. HMOs around the nation are finding that the plans are not 
profitable, and are acting on a Nov. 2 deadline for notifying the 
government that they plan to drop the coverage next year. More than 
250,000 people are being dropped in more than a dozen states, according 
to federal officials. In the New York region, Oxford is by far the 
largest of four companies that have announced that they plan to drop 
a total of 35,000 members by year's end. In a flurry of activity this 
weekend, politicians organized meetings and forums to look for solutions 
and allow subscribers to vent their anger, while state and volunteer 
agencies prepared a huge mailing to explain the options to Oxford 
subscribers, and braced for a flood of phone calls on Monday morning. 
``When a big company says they're pulling out, everyone in the state 
thinks it means them,'' said Christine Lewis, the director for elderly 
rights at the Connecticut Department of Social Services. ``Folks are 
worried they're not going to have any coverage at all.'' Subscribers 
in the New York suburbs are likely to be able to join another HMOs, 
although they may have to pay more for less generous benefits and 
may have to change doctors, officials said. ``Now they have to worry 
about pre-existing conditions, waiting periods and whether they're 
going to be able to afford medicine,'' said Gerd Weindling, the Connecticut 
president of the American Association of Retired Persons. Sen. Christopher 
Dodd, D-Conn., said he thought it was ``crummy'' that he and his constituents 
learned about the change from news reports instead of from the company, 
which is based in Norwalk, Conn. Dodd said he planned to convene a 
meeting of state and federal officials in Bridgeport on Monday afternoon 
to sort out the decision's effect. ``I know these companies aren't 
in the Peace Corps,'' he said, pausing as he campaigned Sunday at 
a fair in Berlin, 15 miles southwest of Hartford. ``They have to make 
a profit. Certainly the companies can act more responsibly. This wasn't 
a lottery, where these companies ended up in these markets. They made 
financial assessments and went out and recruited these people.'' A 
spokeswoman for Oxford said the company had no choice about how to 
announce the news, since it had to file its plan with the federal 
government before it could notify subscribers. She said Oxford unsuccessfully 
tried several ways to continue the service, including sharing management 
costs with hospitals and medical groups. Oxford officials said the 
company was willing to discuss continuing to provide service if the 
federal government would allow Oxford to reduce benefits. The current 
confusion is a gift to the Democratic politicians throughout the nation 
who have tried this fall to make an issue of their plans for tighter 
regulation of HMOs. In Connecticut, for instance, Rep. Barbara Kennelly, 
the Democratic candidate for governor, has proposed a patient-protection 
law that would impose new requirements on the companies and give new 
power to patients. Campaigning at fairs this weekend, the Democratic 
candidate for lieutenant governor, Joseph Courtney, said the Oxford 
brouhaha demonstrated the need for such a law. ``The system is just 
collapsing for people,'' Courtney said. The issue is especially contentious 
in Connecticut, where Gov. John Rowland, a Republican, personally 
intervened last month to prevent two insurers from dropping coverage 
in three rural counties where elderly residents would be left with 
no HMO option. The weekend before the insurers agreed to the deal, 
a 72-year-old man had a heart attack and died at a Norwich forum that 
was called to discuss the cancellations. He had berated the insurers 
before his attack and, according to witnesses, his last words included, 
``Don't dump us.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>