<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was in the second quarter Sunday, when 15 Giants plays netted 1 
yard, that the suspicion grew on the Giants' bench that something 
drastic would have to be done to try to resurrect the team's offense. 
So at the beginning of the second half against Tampa Bay, the Giants 
came out throwing, attempting four passes in six plays. It made little 
difference. Another drive died in the Giants' end of the field. Another 
punt followed. Later, the Giants' defense would create a turnover, 
giving the offense the football at the Tampa Bay 10-yard line. The 
Giants advanced 5 yards and netted a field goal. Nothing the Giants 
tried could save them in an ignominious 20-3 loss to the Buccaneers. 
A clumsy, befuddled Giants offense, stumbling before this game, had 
by far its worst day of the season, incapable of mounting a drive 
longer than 39 yards. It was a performance so inept it left Giants 
quarterback Danny Kanell, who threw an interception that was run back 
for a touchdown on the game's third play, apologizing to his teammates 
on defense afterward. It left Giants Coach Jim Fassel dumbfounded. 
Asked what was wrong with his team's offense, Fassel, whose career 
was built designing and operating offensive football, answered: ``I 
don't know. It's pretty hard for me to figure out, too. It's going 
to take a lot of searching and looking at things. We've got to come 
up with something.'' Other than the sequence that led to their field 
goal, the farthest the Giants (2-3) advanced was the 21-yard line 
of Tampa Bay (2-3). And that drive ended with one of Kanell's three 
interceptions. One Giants series _ three incompletions _ lasted 18 
seconds of playing time. Kanell, who sat out portions of two practices 
last week because of what Fassel termed general soreness, said he 
was healthy and that nothing physical contributed to his dismal performance. 
``I felt horrible, but only because of how I played,'' said Kanell, 
who finished the game with 83 yards passing, completing 10 of 27. 
``I feel responsible. I feel like we let the defense down. I had to 
apologize to them. But they realize I'm struggling to make it better.'' 
The Giants' running game, the main source of the team's problems this 
season, generated less yardage than Kanell. Fullback Charles Way had 
one carry for no yards. Tiki Barber had two carries for minus-2 yards. 
Gary Brown gained 67 yards on 17 carries, but his running was not 
enough to get the Giants out of constant trouble on third down, when 
they converted just two of 12 attempts to pick up a first down. ``Our 
troubles are pretty much across the board,'' Kanell said. ``It's a 
little bit of everything.'' A little bit of everything that added 
up to very little. Kanell may not have been bothered by any physical 
ailment, but he threw as if he were either rusty from a lack of practice 
or otherwise impaired. His second pass was thrown well behind Barber, 
who was running across the middle. Tampa Bay safety Charles Mincy 
intercepted the poorly aimed pass and returned it 22 yards for a touchdown. 
``Danny was rushed on the play,'' Barber said. Said Fassel: ``Obviously, 
that's not where that ball is supposed to be.'' The Giants did little 
to recover offensively. Their defense, meanwhile, continued to play 
well, as it has for most of the season. In the first half, while their 
offensive mates were failing to make a serious threat, the defense 
held the Buccaneers to a 35-yard field goal by Michael Husted late 
in the first quarter. It remained a 10-0 game throughout the third 
quarter in part because the Giants botched a 45-yard field goal attempt. 
Punter Brad Maynard, who is the Giants' holder on place kicks, did 
not position the ball cleanly at first, and place-kicker Brad Daluiso 
did not attempt to kick the ball. An awkward Maynard pass followed. 
Just another Giants incompletion. Early in the fourth quarter, a blitz 
by cornerback Carleton Gray caused Tampa Bay quarterback Trent Dilfer 
to fumble the football at his own 10-yard line. The turnover, however, 
led to a demoralizing turn of events for the Giants. When the offense 
could not punch the football into the end zone from so close _ when 
it could not make it a 3-point game with a touchdown _ the Giants 
defense wilted. Tampa Bay launched a 13-play drive that took up 8 
minutes 18 seconds. Beginning at their 30-yard line, the Buccaneers 
got strong efforts from the Pro Bowl fullback Mike Alstott and Warrick 
Dunn. The pivotal play of the drive came on a third-and-6, when Dilfer 
scrambled in the pocket and threw as he was falling down to Dunn, 
who darted through the Giants secondary to get the first down. Husted 
kicked a 26-yard field goal to give Tampa Bay a 10-point lead. Few 
on the Giants' sideline believed their offense was going to rally 
for two scores in the final five minutes of the game. And on the Giants' 
next possession, Kanell threw his third interception, a pass tipped 
by tight end Howard Cross. Ronde Barber, Tiki's twin brother, grabbed 
the pass, his first National Football League interception. Fassel 
acknowledged that it was possible that the offense's failure to score 
a touchdown after the Dilfer fumble affected team morale. ``The offense 
has to help,'' Fassel said. ``We've got to get some of those into 
the end zone.'' Otherwise, Fassel and several of his players insisted 
there would be no dissension on the team. Carping between the defense 
and offense existed in previous Giants teams under Dan Reeves, who 
brings his 3-1 Atlanta Falcons to Giants Stadium next week. ``I know 
Coach Fassel won't let that happen,'' said safety Percy Ellsworth. 
``He nipped that in the bud when we were 1-3 last year. We were worse 
off then.'' Added linebacker Jessie Armstead: ``We are a family. I 
know Danny didn't play like he wanted to. But he just had a bad day 
on the job. It happens.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>