<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0093 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As awareness of the Year 2000 problem has spread, a wide gulf has 
opened between computer consultants, who say many companies are dangerously 
vulnerable, and Wall Street analysts, most of whom have been telling 
investors there is little to worry about. Now, thanks to new guidelines 
from the Securities and Exchange Commission, this debate is about 
to get something that has been in short supply: public information 
about how most companies are doing in assessing and reducing their 
risks. The new data will appear in reports filed with the SEC in the 
coming weeks summing up corporate earnings for the quarter that ended 
Wednesday. In response to previous prodding from the agency, a majority 
of the 10,000 or so publicly traded companies that file quarterly 
and annual earnings reports started mentioning Year 2000 concerns 
in filings earlier this year. The new reports, though, will be the 
first for most of them since the agency, alarmed at how vague and 
limited most disclosures had been, issued more specific Year 2000 
guidelines two months ago. The SEC guidelines have been viewed positively 
in Congress, which on Thursday sent President Clinton a bill allowing 
companies to exchange information on their Year 2000 readiness or 
put such information on the World Wide Web without fear that the information 
could be used against them in a lawsuit if it turned out to be wrong. 
The protection does not cover knowingly false or reckless statements. 
The Year 2000 problem, also known as the Millennium Bug, stems from 
the longstanding practice of using just two numbers in computer code 
to stand for the year, as in ``98'' for 1998. Computers, software 
and electronic devices may read ``00'' as 1900 instead of 2000 and 
crash or create inaccurate data. The SEC wants companies to discuss 
specifically how much they expect to spend to cope with this problem, 
assess how far along they are in identifying and dealing with their 
problems and describe what, if any, contingency plans they are making. 
It is also requiring reasonable ``worst-case scenarios.'' The agency 
also recommended that all companies consider a variety of disclosures 
that might not be required, like the percentage of their information-technology 
budget being used on Year 2000 projects, whether other information-technology 
investments were being delayed and what outside resources were being 
used to verify that repairs were successful. ``Because the lack of 
information regarding your preparations for the Year 2000 could seriously 
undermine the confidence investors place in your company, it is imperative 
that you provide thorough, meaningful disclosure on this topic,'' 
said SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt in a letter to more than 9,000 chief 
executives. Investors have been given a hint of what the new disclosures 
may look like from companies that filed reports covering the three 
months that ended June 30. The SEC requested that they voluntarily 
observe the new guidelines and many made at least a partial stab at 
it. Year 2000 consultants say the model to date is probably the Phillips 
Petroleum report for the quarter that ended June 30, which was filed 
in mid-August. The Year 2000 disclosure by Phillips ran more than 
1,250 words, over five times the length of the previous quarter. It 
noted that although the overall Year 2000 project was ``on schedule,'' 
a piece of it _ the introduction of new software from the Oracle Corp. 
that would retire a number of defective programs _ was running far 
enough behind schedule that the company had developed contingency 
plans. Phillips said it planned to decide by the end of the third 
quarter whether or not to rely fully on Oracle. (The company decided 
on Thursday that the contingency plan would not be needed, according 
to Del Clark, director of Year 2000 issues for Phillips.) Phillips 
also disclosed that it had spent $20 million of its projected $58 
million budget and that most of the rest _ $21 million _ would go 
to fix or replace chips in machinery and other ``embedded systems.'' 
Mallinckrodt, a St. Louis-based medical equipment and supplies company, 
was less detailed and more confident in its 10-K report for the fiscal 
year that ended June 30, which was filed last week. ``Based on accomplishments 
to date, no contingency plans are expected to be needed and therefore 
none have been developed,'' Mallinckrodt said. The same report might 
make some investors wonder whether Mallinckrodt is too complacent, 
because it disclosed that the company was still assessing what it 
might have to fix or replace in its research, manufacturing, and facility 
management operations _ areas where embedded systems are common. The 
new data should give a snapshot of corporate America's Year 2000 readiness 
and may force some companies to look at the problems more closely. 
``I expect investors to begin voting with their feet by March,'' said 
Jeff Jinnett, a New York lawyer. ``It could be a minefield for companies 
that don't pay a lot of attention to what they are disclosing.'' Some 
Year 2000 consultants doubt, though, that enough reliable information 
will emerge from the new filings to allow investors to make worthwhile 
judgments. ``The guidelines are window dressing unless we have random 
audits in order to determine whether companies are disclosing accurately,'' 
said Louis Marcoccio, Year 2000 director at the Gartner Group in Stamford, 
Conn. Marcoccio said Gartner's research suggested that nearly nine 
out of 10 companies were publicly underestimating their Year 2000 
problems, either knowingly or inadvertently. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>