<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981004.0202 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The two college football coaches on top believe they know something 
about staying there. Ohio State's John Cooper said that piling up 
``solid wins'' makes his team immune to the whims of poll voters and 
the computer-ranking calculations. Nebraska's Frank Solich said that 
achieving consistent excellence is about winning the games you are 
supposed to win. This weekend, the Buckeyes, ranked No. 1 in The Associated 
Press media poll, the coaches poll and The New York Times computer 
ranking, notched a solid, if not spectacular, 28-9 victory over Big 
10 rival Penn State. And the Cornhuskers, ranked No. 2 in all three, 
just barely won a game they should have won easily by stopping Oklahoma 
State running back Nathan Simmons a foot short of the goal line on 
the final play to preserve a 24-17 victory. But living up to a coach's 
adage is harder than it looks. Survey the current college football 
landscape for the evidence. Better, consider that Cooper's and Solich's 
teams have to live up to the other's axiom if the Buckeyes and the 
Cornhuskers are going to meet in the Fiesta Bowl for the national 
title. In the coming weeks, Nebraska needs solid victories over ranked 
teams Texas A&AMP;M, Missouri and Kansas State. Ohio State has beaten 
three Top 25 teams, but now heads into its Big 10 schedule against 
seven teams that have a combined record of 16-17 _ none of them ranked, 
not even its traditional nemesis, Michigan. Those are games the Buckeyes 
should win. How hard will that be? Louisiana State needed a solid 
victory over Georgia on Saturday night to continue to climb in the 
polls. LSU was at home in Tiger Stadium, one of the most difficult 
places in the nation for a visitor to play, and twice late in the 
game the Tigers drove deep into Georgia territory but came away with 
field goals. They lost, 28-27. Worse, Georgia's freshman quarterback, 
Quincy Carter, came up bigger than LSU's senior Heisman Trophy candidate, 
Kevin Faulk. While Faulk managed 88 yards on 17 carries, Carter completed 
27 of 34 passes for 318 yards and 2 touchdowns. He led touchdown drives 
in the Bulldogs' first three possessions. Carter also rushed for 41 
yards, caught a pass for 36 yards and helped move his team up solidly 
in both rankings. ``I feel bad that we were in position to make a 
move and we haven't made it yet,'' LSU coach Gerry DiNardo said. ``Nothing 
is permanent. We'll have another opportunity. I feel bad for the team, 
but we have a lot of football left in us. It was fun being sixth and 
trying to get higher, so we took a step back.'' In the solid-victory 
category, UCLA beat Washington State, 49-17, and Arizona bested Washington, 
31-28, when Wildcat quarterback Ortege Jenkins somersaulted over three 
defenders into the end zone with four seconds left to cap a highlight-ready 
9-yard scramble and the come-from-behind victory. ``He just wanted 
it more than the guys standing in the end zone,'' Arizona Coach Dick 
Tomey said. Like Nebraska, Tennessee and Florida won games they should 
have in very ugly fashion. The Volunteers had a 17-0 lead in the first 
quarter but barely hung on, 17-9, courtesy of Auburn's three turnovers. 
Six times, the Gators were inside Alabama's 12-yard line. But they 
turned the ball over three times and settled for three field goals 
to eke out a 16-10 victory. Tennessee (4-0) dropped a spot to No. 
4 in the AP poll, and to seventh from third in the Times ranking, 
for the shaky performance. Florida, whose only loss was to the Vols, 
was bumped up two spots to No. 6 in the AP poll, but dropped to 21st 
from 14th in the Times ranking. Judging by Steve Spurrier's post-game 
remarks, the pollsters were generous. ``We're extremely fortunate 
to win the ball game,'' the forlorn Florida coach said. ``I never 
had a ball game like this in my life. The Gators don't play like champions 
anymore.'' Blame reputation for Nebraska not being penalized for barely 
winning a game in which it was outplayed: Oklahoma State had 355 total 
yards to 215 for Nebraska and had the ball for 35 of the 60 minutes. 
Solich, in his first year, learned his ``win the ones you should'' 
lesson from his mentor, Tom Osborne. Over 25 years, Osborne lost only 
one game to a team that finished below .500 _ in 1992 to Iowa State. 
Still, each season the Cornhuskers seem to survive a harrowing experience. 
Last year against Missouri, on the final play of regulation, a desperate 
Shevin Wiggins kicked a Scott Frost pass into the end zone and into 
the arms of his teammate Matt Davison. It sent the game into overtime, 
and Nebraska prevailed, 45-38. Against Oklahoma State, the break came 
when Cowboys lineman Reynell Lavigne lined up in the wrong spot on 
the final play and Nebraska's Mike Rucker knifed in to stop Simmons' 
plunge. ``Sometimes your whole season comes down to one play, and 
sometimes it comes down to one foot,'' Rucker said. The Buckeyes, 
meanwhile, can't lose focus as they march to their season finale with 
Michigan. Ohio State doesn't play Wisconsin (No. 12 AP, No. 19 Times), 
and only Michigan State looks remotely dangerous. The Buckeyes play 
a disappointing Michigan team at home. Still, Ohio State is 1-8-1 
against the Wolverines since 1987. Can the Buckeyes win the games 
they should? ``It's just a matter of motivation,'' Ohio State linebacker 
Jerry Rudzinski said. ``We're 4-0 and still haven't played our best 
game. I think that's enough motivation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>